Advent 4

Readings: Micah 5:2-5a, Canticle 15, Hebrews 10:5-10, Luke 1:39-55

The Gospel of Luke is unique among the four gospels.  It is the only one that claims to be well researched from earlier narratives.  Its style and vocabulary indicate an audience of educated Greek culture.  The author, who almost certainly also wrote the Acts of the Apostles, employs in those two books 750 Greek words that occur nowhere else in the New Testament.  Many of these words bear highly technical meanings, which gives a precision to Luke's narrative that is unlike the more poetic Greek of the other accounts.

Nevertheless, Luke's gospel includes some of the most memorable stories in the New Testament not found in the other gospels: the parables of the Good Samaritan and the Prodigal Son, the repentant thief on the cross, twelve-year-old Jesus in the Temple, his birth in a stable, the angels appearing to the shepherds.  So many themes that seem tailor-made for stained glass and Sunday School.  Luke warms our hearts with these stories, and we begin to think of him as almost a member of our own family.  

Todays's gospel reading, the story of the Visitation, appears to be another one of those sweet family stories.  Mary, having just learned from an angel that she will bear the Messiah, goes to visit her hill-country cousin, Elizabeth, who is also expecting a miraculous child.  Elizabeth's baby jumps in the womb, and this sets off an emotional exchange between the two women, filled with superlatives of rejoicing.  One could almost say they were hysterical.

The English word hysteria, by the way, comes from the Greek word for uterus, "hystera" -- probably from the intense emotions associated with pregnancy and labor.  That it has become in English a useful term for undermining the validity of emotions speaks volumes about our cultural attitudes toward both emotions and women.  The rationalism of our Western culture presumes that the emotion is not the reality; that cooler heads can dissect the situation to learn the truth; that emotion is essentially an artifact of evolution that we might be better to outgrow.  But that isn't the only way of seeing it.

We can take a cue from Hebrew and the other Semitic languages here.  They also have a word derived from the word for "womb" that describes a state of being: "racham" means "compassion".  The all-absorbing compassion of the mother for the child that she is bearing. A child who is weak now, but who with great care can become strong.  Love is and will be the source of that strength.

How different are the two pregnancies in our narrative!  Elizabeth is old, and had given up the hope of child-bearing.  Mary is young, too young -- and pregnant before marriage.  Elizabeth is happily married to a priest, and her pregnancy relieves her of the cultural shame of barrenness.  Mary, on the other hand, is probably suspected of an illicit affair, as hinted at in the Gospel of Matthew -- or at least of having been raped (which at that time was just as guilt-conferring).  The shadow of social stigma will long outlive this young girl named Mary.  The rumor that Jesus' real father was a Roman soldier named Pantera persisted for centuries, is assumed to be true in the Talmud, and even enjoys renewed circulation today.  According to all social norms, Mary should be ashamed.

But she's not.

	My soul proclaims the greatness of the Lord,
	my spirit rejoices in God my Savior
	for he has looked with favor on his lowly servant.

This and the rest of the Magnificat bears a striking resemblance to the song of Hannah in I Samuel 2, in which Hannah celebrates her deliverance from barrenness.  We might be tempted to think that Mary is celebrating not for herself but for Elizabeth, whose situation more closely follows that of Hannah.  But then Mary says,

	From this day all generations will call me blessed:
	the Almighty has done great things for me,
	and holy is his name.

Blessed, not ashamed.  Mary is not just okay with her situation, she is exultant.  The Greek word translated as "rejoices" in verse 47 is "egallíasen" -- literally, to jump around for joy.  It is closely related to the word that Elizabeth used in verse 44 to describe her baby's joy: "agalliásei".  Baby John literally "skipped in jumping-joy."  What are they so happy about?

Anyone who has witnessed the birth of a child can tell you about the holiness of that breaking forth of new life into the world.  Like Hannah before her, though, Mary's exultation sees beyond that event to something even greater: the intrusion of God's salvation into a broken world.  Those who have been suffering will be lifted up, and those who have been causing the suffering will be brought low.

	He has shown the strength of his arm,
	he has scattered the proud in their conceit.
	He has cast down the mighty from their thrones,
	and has lifted up the lowly.
	He has filled the hungry with good things,
	and the rich he has sent away empty.

This is not happy news for the proud, the mighty, and the rich.  Gentle Mary, meek and mild, isn't willing to sit silently in her shrine in support of the established order.  She, like Hannah before her, exults in the way that God flips the tables of those who think they are in control -- and thus brings deliverance to those under oppression.  The birth of this child Jesus has come precisely for that purpose.

Luke's Sunday School narrative has suddenly taken a revolutionary turn.  As sweet as Luke can often be, we should remember that he can also be harsh.  Compare Matthew's account of the Beatitudes with Luke's, for example.  Matthew has eight "blesseds" -- Luke has four of those, but adds four corresponding "woes": woes to the rich, woe to those who are full, woe to those who are laughing, and woe to those of whom others speak well.  Both accounts have Jesus predict the exaltation of the lowly, but Luke adds the debasement of the proud.

I think it not a coincidence that Luke uses the word "agalliáo" ("jump for joy") in exactly one other place in his gospel.  In Luke 10, after the seventy have returned and reported their successes, Jesus jumped for joy in the Holy Spirit, and said, 'I thank you, O Father, ... that you have hidden these things from the wise and understanding, and revealed them to little children."  Not those who in our minds should be the authority on the subject, but rather to those who approach in childlike humility.

How do we apply this to our lives?  The political and social applications should be obvious.  We should beware of allying ourselves to any earthly power, or giving any pride of place to any authority above that of the call of Christ.  Nation, church, and even family can easily become false gods that will be thrown down.  We must carefully discern in the Spirit whether our service to these institutions is done unto God or for some lesser goal.  And we should be very suspicious when political and social power is given into our hands.  Suspicious of the reasons why it is granted to us, and suspicious of ourselves for accepting it.  Instead, we should ally ourselves with those who are oppressed: feed the hungry, clothe the naked, relieve the suffering, welcome the stranger.  They don't have to deserve it, because we are to receive them as Christ -- and Christ deserves it.

We can also apply this principle to the internal workings of our souls.  What in us has become rich, full, insensitive, or admired?  Get ready for it to be brought low.  Are we wise and learned?  Prepare to be made a fool.  Are we so spiritual?  We must become poor in spirit, or ours is not the Kingdom of Heaven but some poor counterfeit.  Can we, with Mary, jump for joy in the favor shown to God's lowly servants?  May it be so.
