Pentecost

Readings: Genesis 11:1-9, Acts 2:1-11


πῶς ἡμεῖς ἀκούομεν ἕκαστος τῇ ἰδίᾳ διαλέκτῳ ἡμῶν ἐν ᾗ ἐγεννήθημεν;

Didn't you get that?  It's verse 8 of our lesson from Acts, in Greek.  Greek was the closest thing to a universal language that existed at the time of the first apostles.  It's the language you would choose to say something that you wanted to make understandable by everyone in the world, which is why the New Testament came down to us in Greek.  And yet today, very few people can understand it outside of Greece, Cyprus, and academia.

A similar thing happened to Latin in Europe, and Aramaic in the Middle East.  The eleventh chapter of Genesis -- the story of the Tower of Babel -- may reflect a cultural memory of the similar decline of Akkadian, the earliest attested Semitic language of the early Mesopotamian empires.  As those empires diverged, so did the dialects of Akkadian into Old Assyrian and Old Babylonian, and those were eventually pushed aside by Aramaic.  The similarities between all of the Semitic languages would naturally lead the ancients to conclude that they came from a common tongue, as linguists still believe -- although they place that ancestor further back than Akkadian.

In the story of the Tower of Babel, the Lord mixes up the language of a people who have achieved union of purpose, and as a result they can no longer understand each other and go their separate ways.  Today we tend to think that separation and isolation of populations is more often a cause than an effect of language diversity.  But regardless of how historical the acount in Genesis may be, there is an important lesson for us here: when we stop hearing what the other person is saying, when we talk past each other, when the words I use mean one thing to me and something else to you and we fail to account for that, then we become divided and isolated.  When we look on people who "don't speak our language" with suspicion, or blame them for everything that's wrong with the world, then we only deepen the divide and prevent understanding and cooperation.

What drives that?  Why do we fail to understand one another?  In harmony with the story of the Garden of Eden, the Genesis narrative blames it on human pride.  The builders wanted to "make a name for themselves" and on the surface it looks like God felt threatened by that and had to do something about it, just as he had driven Adam and Eve out of the garden to keep them from becoming immortal.  A deeper reading of both passages, though, focuses on the separation that humanity had already caused: between ourselves and God.  Adam and Eve ate the fruit not to become one with God, but to become "like gods" -- separate and independent.  Likewise the builders of the tower, in seeking to "make a name for themselves" were asserting their own power and their own plans for their destiny.  They wanted to avoid being scattered over the face of the earth.  Even though that prospect scared them, it was after all God's destiny for them -- to fill the whole earth.  They thought they had a better plan.

Our incessant proclivity to favor our own small, ego-based plans over trusting in God's guidance not only poisons our relationship with God, it also spreads within us to a mistrust of others.  If we have an agenda that we need to defend and promote, then we naturally view anyone who differs from that path as a threat.  Those most different from us, by their very existence, call into question the decisions we have made for ourselves.  But it doesn't stop there.  It continues to spread to our shunning of neighbors and associates who (knowingly or not) have violated our standards of behavior.  As we continue to assert our rightness, we soon find that we aren't even on speaking terms with members of our own family.

In Luke's telling of the Pentecost story, an unexpected and miraculous understanding of language leads to the gathering together of a diverse group of people to hear the message of the gospel.  This is a reversal of what happened at the Tower of Babel.  Rather than confusion, God brings understanding.  Rather than separation, it leads to unity.  That unity is for the purpose of following God's plan rather than ours.

Whereas the Babel intervention is precipitated by human ego, the disciples on the day of Pentecost are gathered together humbly and with one accord in prayer (as we're told in chapter 1). Not knowing what the future might hold.  Not trying to control that outcome for their own ends.  Trusting what Jesus had said, that they would be given the power to do the great work that he had in store for them.

Will White, of the Community of the Mother of Jesus, wrote on Facebook a couple of days ago: "The true miracle of Pentecost was what took place in the upper room, the Cenacle, before the tongues of fire. As they waited for the Spirit of God, they were becoming a new community. Only when they "were all with one accord, in one place" (KJV) could the sign of God be made visible and the ministry that Jesus had commissioned them to do, begin to manifest in the world."  (https://www.facebook.com/williamandrewwhite/posts/10211603771551954)

In Genesis, following the dispersion of peoples, God calls Abraham (chapter 12).  The "chosen people" thus becomes a narrower group, only to be narrowed further between Isaac and Ishmael, then Jacob and Esau; eventually to Judah only with the deportation of the northern tribes, then to the remnant of the exile.  By the time of Christ, splinter groups within Judaism each asserted their righteousness to the exclusion of the paths chosen by others.

In Acts 2, the union of Jews and proselytes from all over the world is only the beginning.  Following Jesus' example, Philip is soon evangelizing the Samaritans, and by chapter 10 Peter witnesses the Holy Spirit fall upon even non-Jewish Romans!  After Paul's conversion, he who had been most insistent on "doing things our way" finds himself carrying the good news to Gentiles everywhere and championing their freedom from the legalistic requirements of Judaism.  But Paul also honors the Jewish traditions in his own practice of faith.  In other words, Paul supports religious diversity among the faithful.  He sees that Christ is much larger than the traditions of any group or nation.  Christ unites the whole world, and all of creation, in God.  That is the good news.  That is the power of the Holy Spirit.
