Fifth Sunday of Easter

Readings: Acts 8:26-40, Psalm 22:24-30, I John 4:7-21, John 15:1-8

"Ask for whatever you wish, and it will be done for you."  How do you react to this verse?  With incredulity?  With the eagerness of magical thinking ("ooh boy I can't wait for that new car")?  Do you remember times when you asked for something, with all the desire of your heart, but didn't get it?  Did you conclude that you just didn't have enough faith?  Or that this promise of Jesus just isn't true?  Or that this is a mystery that hasn't yet been revealed to you?  This verse always attracts my attention because there is so much potential resting on it.  And Jesus himself says that God is glorified in this, "that you bear much fruit and become my disciples."

"He removes every branch in me that bears no fruit.  Every branch that bears fruit he prunes to make it bear more fruit."  I often glide right over those statements -- they're not nearly as attractive as getting whatever I want.  Who wants to be pruned?  Or worse, thrown away, withered, and burned in the fire?  That probably refers to other people, right?  God will go easy on me -- of course God understands everything I'm dealing with in my life right now.

And anyway, what's going on with this metaphor?  How do these fruits line up?  Are we comparing apples to apples here?  If getting whatever I wish is the same as bearing fruit, how is it that when that doesn't happen I am the one who gets burned?

Oops, we missed an important condition:  "If you abide in me, and my words abide in you...".  "Just as the branch cannot bear fruit by itself unless it abides in the vine, neither can you unless you abide in me."  So what does it mean, to "abide in me?"  Is this just about signing on a dotted line somewhere, responding tearfully to an altar call, making a one-time commitment to Jesus?

The Greek word translated here as "abide" is "meno", which means to "stay."  It's related etymologically to our English words "remain" and "permanent".  This isn't a one-time thing.  It also isn't a quid pro quo.  This is not a transaction, it's a transformation.  We are to become one with Christ.  And in order to become one with Christ, anything that is not of Christ must be stripped away.

Our Epistle lesson tells us that "if we love one another, God lives in us, and his love is perfected in us" and also "those who say, 'I love God.' and hate their brothers and sisters, are liars."  There is no room for love to be selective, because God loves everyone and if we are to become one with God then we too must love everyone.

Love is such a tricky word, in just about every language.  The word used here in Greek, agapao, may be a little easier to pin down, but it's not as clear-cut as some exegetes would have you believe.  In John's epistle, however, it is consistently used to mean an active caring for the other.  In chapter 3, verse 17, we read "But whoever has the world's goods, and sees his brother in need, and closes his compassion from him, how does the love of God abide in him?"  Ooh, there's that word "abide" again -- yep, it's the same word as in our gospel lesson: meno.  John uses it again in today's reading: "those who abide in love abide in God, and God abides in them."

What does this love look like?  Later on in our gospel chapter (15:13), Jesus says, "Greater love has no one than this, that someone lay down his life for his friends".  Earlier in John's epistle (3:16), we read "By this we know love, because he laid down his life for us.  And we ought to lay down our lives for the brothers and sisters."  Philip converts the eunuch by beginning with the humiliation of Jesus, and staring from that point he tells him the "good news".  Paul talks in Philippians 2 about Christ's self-emptying, and tells his readers to be of the same mind.  And in Galations 2:20 Paul says, "I have been crucified with Christ -- I no longer live, but Christ in me."  

Practically speaking, what does that mean?  It means that our small self must die, so that we can live into our true self in Christ.  What we want for "ourself" is in direct conflict with this, because any identity we derive from what we get has to be smaller than the identity for which we are destined, which is an identity of radical self-outpouring.  It means that any time we look on another person as a threat, we aren't yet where we're supposed to be going.  If we see them as a threat, it means that we fear something from them: maybe it's a loss of money, or property, or job, or status, or being right, or some other false identity.  As John's epistle states in our reading, "there is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear."  That's because perfect love does not want a specific outcome for itself, but has transcended the desires of the self.  Our sisters and brothers are also destined for union with us. In this life they are opportunities for us to learn how to love.

Augustine said, "Love God and do as you please."  That's because, if you love as God loves, what you please will be the will of God.  What you ask for in Christ's name will be what God gladly gives: transcendence of self and love for others.  This may (and often does!) include miracles -- but the point of the miracle is not a demonstration of magical power but rather a provision of what is necessary to draw us closer to God.  Sometimes, though, what draws us closer is the anti-miracle -- what our small self considers a loss.  That part of us, that small self that has lesser goals, needs pruning.  That's how we bear more fruit and become Christ's disciples.  May it be so.
