Proper 15

Readings: Proverbs 9:1-6, Psalm 34:9-14, Ephesians 5:15-20, John 6:51-58

Wisdom is a woman.  That's how our lesson from Proverbs portrays her -- as a wealthy and generous lady who invites many to her feast.  But why a woman instead of a man?  A simple answer is that the Hebrew word for wisdom (chakhmah) is feminine.  Unlike in English, all nouns in Hebrew have gender.  Since the word for wisdom is feminine, our author naturally personifies it (or rather, her) as female.

Wisdom is also plural -- in the Hebrew, that is.  Instead of chakhmah, we have chakhmoth -- which an unwise translator might be tempted to render as "wisdoms."  Hebrew, however, is not as clear with its use of plurals as is English.  The Hebrew plural often indicates, not multiplicity, but rather magnification.  It can sometimes resemble the "royal we" that we rarely use in English: representing majesty or intensification -- or perhaps as an abstract name for the whole concept -- or some combination of these senses.  A signal that this is intended in this passage is that Wisdom acts with singular verbs.  In English, we usually represent this kind of elevated singular by capitalization: Wisdom with a capital W.  Just as a Hebrew plural for god ("elohim") often means God with a capital G.

Wisdom in the book of Proverbs is more than an abstract concept.  She is raised to the level of the Divine.  Chapter 8 says that she existed with the Lord before the beginning of creation and was instrumental in executing it.  This idea is picked up in the New Testament and applied to Christ.  John 1:2-3 says that the Word "was in the beginning with God.  All things were made through him, and without him was not one thing made that has been made."  Colossians 1:16 says of Christ that "all things have been created through him and to him."

Paul, in I Corinthians 1:24, says that "Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God." Many other New Testament passages also identify, more or less explicitly, Wisdom with Christ.  The early church therefore interpreted the person of Wisdom in Proverbs (and in the books of Wisdom and Sirach) as references to Christ.

You may have heard of the great Basilica of Hagia Sophia in Istanbul.  Rebuilt and consecrated in the year 538, it was dedicated to Christ as the personification of Wisdom.  It's name means "Holy Wisdom" in Greek -- and is feminine, because the Greek word for wisdom ("sophia") is also feminine.  There seems to be a trend here.

Wisdom isn't the only feminine aspect of the Divine in the Bible.  The Hebrew word for Spirit ("ruach") is also grammatically feminine.  Female imagery applied to God abounds, especially that of God giving birth or nurturing young.  The Hebrew word for compassion ("racham"), a frequent characteristic of God, comes from the same root word as "womb" ("rechem").  God is often likened to a mother bird, perhaps most strikingly in Luke 13:34 (Matt 23:37), where Jesus laments over Jerusalem, "How often I wanted to gather your children together, as a hen gathers her own brood under her wings, but you refused."

The Bible also contains ample male images of God: Father, warrior, king, and of course the human incarnation of Jesus.  That comes as no surprise from a culture in which women were generally powerless, making it all the more remarkable that so much feminine imagery for God has survived.  What we should take away from all of this is that God is not limited to one gender.  As Paul says in Galatians 3:28, "there is neither male nor female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus."  God transcends gender, and unifies us beyond gender.  We should get over the limitations we place on God as being only male, and stop pushing the feminine aside to find expression only in increasingly marginalized Marys.

But back to Wisdom.  How do we apply wisdom to our lives?  A quick reading of the Old Testament wisdom literature gives the impression that wisdom can be boiled down to "revere God, and keep his commandments," as it says in Ecclesiastes 12:13.  But that seemingly simple precept turns out to be much more involved when Wisdom as Christ meets the world of human society.  Rather than appearing wise, those who follow Christ often seem foolish according to the wisdom of that world.That's because human wisdom and Holy Wisdom have different goals.

Ephesians 5:19 says, "don't be drunk with wine but be filled with the Spirit," which evokes the day of Pentecost as described in Acts 2.  Some of the bystanders observed the disciples speaking in the Spirit and concluded that they were drunk.  The foolishness of drunkenness lies largely in its loss of self-control.  We humans believe that it is wise to control ourselves, whether we always do it or not.  The disciples were also out of control, which others might see as foolish.  But in the Wisdom of Christ it was not foolish, precisely because having control over one's own life is not to be preferred to giving that control over to God.  This is something that most of the world doesn't understand.

Our gospel lesson has Jesus facing off against a crowd that doesn't understand, and what he says to them doesn't help.  "Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you have no life in you."  As Paul says in I Corinthians 1:23-24, this is "a stumbling block to Jews, and foolishness to Greeks, but to those who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God."

What does it mean to eat Christ's flesh and drink Christ's blood?  John's Greek is shockingly visceral.  Jesus changes the word he has been using for "eat" to "trogo", which means "chew" or "gnaw" -- and the word he uses for "drink" ("pino") is also stronger than the usual word ("pio").  This isn't just a taste.  Consuming Jesus, and in turn being consumed by Christ, is the most intense form of intimacy.  The Wisdom of Christ seeks nothing less than complete and total union:  "they who eat my flesh and drink my blood live in me, and I in them.  

The Eucharist is our sacramental experience of that union.  Perhaps it is no coincidence that in Proverbs, Wisdom offers bread and wine.

This union with God and with others is foolishness to the world, because it requires that we nail our ego to the cross -- sacrificng the most basic of human values in order to gain a far greater prize:  resurrection to our true self-transcendant identity in Christ.
