Proper 6

Readings: I Samuel 15:34-16:13, Psalm 20, 2 Corinthians 5:6-17, Mark 4:26-34

Have you ever experienced a loss that was so intense that you felt as though your world had ended?  For a while you clung to hope that things would work out, but as the last embers of that hope were finally extinguished, you could only sit in the midst of the ruins of what you had imagined and mourn.  It almost seemed cruel that the sun was shining brightly.  You also felt a strange lightness, as if a weight of caring and worrying had suddenly been lifted from you.  You chided yourself for that feeling, telling yourself that it was right and proper for you to feel miserable.  Yet, in the corner of your eye you could see endless new possibilities opening up around you, now that the demands, responsibilities, and identity that you had assumed were suddenly torn from you, no matter how tightly and lovingly your clenched fists had held onto them.

This unexpected lightness after loss is not just an errant feeling or wayward thought.  It is a manifestation of a deep truth, that as we let the old things go, a new creation follows, just as surely as the dawn follows the darkness of night.  After the storm has passed, no matter what the damage, there is an incredible freshness in the air.

"The old things have passed on," says Paul in our reading from Corinthians, "Behold, they have become new!"

The word used here for "new" here is the Greek "kainos" which carries a connotation of "freshness" and "innovation" rather than merely "new" in age (the Greek "neos" would be have been used for that sense).  In fact, this new creation that Paul is talking about is not new in time at all; it is very ancient.  According to Paul, it was part of God's plan from the beginning to redeem all of creation.

But it isn't painless.  In Romans 8:22 Paul writes that "the whole creation groans and travails in pain together until now" evoking the image of labor pains while giving birth.  There will be tearing of flesh; there will be blood lost; "but when she gives birth to the child, she no longer remembers the anguish because of the joy that a child has been born into the world" (John 16:21).

Why this pain?  Why do we have to lose our life in order to find it (as Jesus said in Matthew 10:39)?

I often wonder what thoughts were running through Paul's mind during those three days that he sat blind in Damascus after his encounter with the risen Christ.

First up: "What the **** just happened?"

Soon to be followed by: "What on earth am I going to do with this?

If I join this new Way and follow Jesus, I will have to give up literally everything.

I have been a good Pharisee all my life -- out the window.

How could this wannabe prophet from Nazareth of all places who flouted the traditions we have always held most sacred, and who was despised by all of our authorities and shamefully beaten and crucified by the Romans -- how could he of all people be the Messiah?

My friends and associates won't just think I've gone mad, they will literally want to kill me.

What would my mother think?

But I can't deny the reality of that encounter.  He spoke to me, and it was so real that nothing else matters."

Nothing else matters.  

There is one other place in Paul's writings where he uses the phrase "new creation" (Greek "kaine ktisis") and that is Galatians 6:15: "For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision is anything, but a new creation."  Nothing else matters, not even religious observances.

Our pain of loss comes from our attachment to that which we are losing.  We are called to lose all attachments but one: "Take up your cross, and follow me" (Mark 10:21).  We are called to be crucified with Christ (Galatians 2:20), which means dying to all other attachments.  God will not be finished with us until this work is complete.  Psalm 39:12 says "like a moth you eat away all that is dear to us" which in the same verse is parallel to "with rebukes for sin you punish us" -- sin is valuing anything more than the "one needful thing" (Luke 10:42), union with God in love.  So it is during these times of loss and suffering that God performs the greatest work in us, as St. John of the Cross says.  That dark night of the soul precedes the breaking of a new dawn, and not only in the life to come: the new creation starts now.

In verse 14 of our reading, Paul says that "the love of Christ constrains us" -- the NRSV translates this as "urges us on" but the Greek word (sunecho) literally means to compress or arrest, and figuratively to compel, afflict, or constrain.  We don't follow Christ because it's pleasant.  We follow because we can't do anything else.  The encounter with Christ constrains us.  Jesus' death and resurrection reveal, just as it was revealed undeniably to Paul on the road to Damascus, that the human way of looking at things falls short.  To the religious elite, Jesus looked like a two-bit con-artist with delusions of grandeur.  To many others, he looked like a wonder-worker who could solve their problems and provide all the bread they could want.  Some, including his own disciples, expected him to be the political savior of their nation.  But when our eyes are opened to faith and compassion, we see that he was the humility of God embracing the worst we had to give in order to turn us all around.

May we take up our cross, and follow Christ -- into that new creation.
