Proper 12

Readings: 2 Kings 4:42-44, Psalm 145:10-19, Ephesians 3:14-21, John 6:1-21

In reading through our lessons for today, I immediately noticed the theme of God's provision.  The Psalmist says:

The eyes of all wait upon you, O LORD,*
  and you give then their food in due season.

You open wide your hand *
  and satisfy the needs of every living creature.

In both our Old Testament and Gospel readings we have accounts of abundant feeding from a paltry supply.  Reading John's version, you have to wonder what the little boy thought about having his lunch taken away.  And how is it that Andrew knows about this kid's stash?  I think he's been scoping out the crowd because he's been hungry for a while, and rather than trusting Jesus to make dinner plans (he sometimes goes without eating for, like, forty days) he's working on some contingencies of his own.  The message here seems to be that we should trust God's provision, and be willing to give up what he asks from us.

But there's more here.  Have you ever noticed how often food enters into the gospel, and not only in the Eucharist?  When Jesus raises the little girl in Mark 5, he tells her parents to give her something to eat.  After the resurrection, Jesus appears to the disciples and his first question after the initial excitment dies down is "you got anything to eat?"  When he appears at the end of John's gospel on the beach, he greets them with some freshly cooked fish.  Jesus is a foodie.

From a literary perspective, these examples all work to demonstrate that resurrection is of the body -- the little girl, and Jesus after his resurrection, can eat something because they are raised in the flesh, not as just some vision or ghost.  More broadly, though, this speaks to how God's provision for us is incarnational.  The gospel doesn't align with the Gnostic idea that the physical world is evil.  Our bodies, too, are part of what God redeems -- not only our souls or spirits.  That is why Christ came in the flesh.

But I see another theme in these readings:  wait for it... surprise!  God reaches out to us in unexpected ways, and as in both our Old Testament and gospel readings, we sometimes respond with objections and incredulity until God actually does it.  Part of how we learn trust (which is the nature of faith) is that God doesn't let us put God in a box.  Later in this same chapter of John, Jesus accuses the crowd of trying to make their relationship to him transactional: "Very truly, I tell you, you are looking for me, not because you saw signs, but because you ate your fill of the loaves."  God's provision demonstrates God's love for us, but the provision itself isn't the point -- trusting God is.  To teach us that, God employs surprise, and often makes us wait for it.

I thought I had this homily all laid out, but as I was rereading our gospel passage for today, I was suddenly struck by verse 12:  "Gather up the fragments, so that nothing may be lost."

If you've ever participated in a large picnic on the grass, you might be able to imagine the state of these leftover scraps of bread and fish.  Grass stains; mud; someone stepped on that one; this one's half-chewed -- not a pretty sight.  But Jesus wants them, "so that nothing may be lost."

The Greek word used here for "fragments" is "klasmata," and it is used by all four gospels in the various versions of this story of the feeding of the multitude, and not anywhere else in the New Testament.  It comes from the verb "klao" ("break"), which in the New Testament always has bread as the object -- in this story, in accounts of the Eucharist, and a few other occasions that are arguably references to the Eucharist.

Breaking bread is a very practical solution to the problem of how to share it.  Bread is baked in loaves. In ancient Palestine the loaves were a good bit smaller than what you'll find in the local bakery or grocery store today, but if you're sharing them at the ratio of 1 per thousand as in our gospel, or even 1 per twelve as at the first Eucharist, you need to divide them in some way.  Rather than whipping out a bread knife and neatly carving evenly-sized pieces, Jesus and the early church used human hands to pull the bread apart into non-uniform, perhaps crumbly fragments.

The Eucharist signifies our union with Christ and with each other as the body of Christ.  How is it that unity is expressed in the fragmentation of the bread?

I believe that the whole problem of evil in our world -- every injustice, every killing, every act of hatred and discrimination, every greed, every hurtful word, and every prideful or vainglorious thought -- originates in the illusion that we are individually separate from God and from one another.  That this illusion seems inescapable in our daily lives is my definition of the Fall from Grace.

And so, the bread must be broken, in order to be given to us each in our isolation.  In eating the bread, we become it -- we become the body of Christ.  And we're each a uniquely shaped piece -- formed that way by the humane hands of God.  But we are also still broken.  Some of us might be crumbling.  Our lives might feel stained by our past actions or by the actions of others.  We might have been stepped on, or half-chewed and spit out.

But Jesus wants us anyway.  "Gather up the fragments, so that nothing may be lost."  The Bread of Life was broken so that Christ could come into each of us in our brokenness, but it doesn't stop there.  When Christ dwells within us, Christ transforms us in ways that we might not think we're going to like but that will amaze us when we look back.  God won't stop, no matter how much we fight it, until this work is complete.  Our destination is to be truly one, and that means welcoming all the other broken fragments into the same basket with ourselves.  We will only have full Communion when we come into union with all of our sisters and brothers and all of creation -- every one of us -- in God.  We might not be able even to imagine this, but God can.

"Now to him who by the power at work within us is able to accomplish abundantly far more than all we can ask or imagine, to him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus to all generations, forever and ever.  Amen."
