Proper 25

Readings: Job 42:1-6, 10-17; Psalm 34:1-8,19-22; Hebrews 7:23-28; Mark 10:46-52

"What do you want me to do for you?" asks Jesus.

Bartimaeus has been calling out for Jesus.  The name Bartimaeus is Aramaic for "son of Timaeus," and Mark gives a translation here as he does for many Aramaic words, providing evidence that at least some of the narratives in this gospel were originally told in Aramaic and later retold in Greek.  In this case, though, Mark doesn't explicitly tell us that he's translating (as he does elsewhere).  It seems to me that Mark can't decide whether "Bartimaeus" should be treated as a proper name or translated, so he just gives both.  It was common for Jewish men  of this era to be called "Bar" followed by their father's name, as evidenced by "Bar-Kokhbah," Bar-Jesus in Acts, and others, although usually their given name was also recorded at least once.  Bar-Timaeus' given name has disappeared -- perhaps because, as a blind beggar, he has no identity worth holding onto.  Even his father's name, Timaeus, might be from a Semitic root meaning "defiled."

Certainly the crowd following Jesus treat Bar-Timaeus as a persona non grata.  When he calls out to Jesus, many of them rebuke him.  

But Bar-Timaeus continues to cry out, "Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!"  By calling Jesus "Son of David", Bar-Timaeus gives him a Messianic title.  Several times earlier in this Gospel, Jesus seems intent on suppressing attempts to make himself known -- but that has not proven successful.  Jesus' entry into Jerusalem follows this passage, in which his Messiahship will be proclaimed openly by many.

In asking Jesus to have mercy on him, Bar-Timaeus implies that Jesus is able to help him.  No doubt he has heard about many of the healings that Mark narrates earlier.

Jesus stops and says, "Call him here!," and the fickle crowd immediately reverses its evaluation of Bar-Timaeus.  "Take heart," they say encouragingly, using the very same mouths that not two minutes previously had been telling him that he wasn't worth any attention at all -- that he was not worthy even to pollute the air with his cries for help.

"What do you want for me to do for you?" asks Jesus.  Bar-Timaeus wants to see.  To see again.  The Greek word here, anablepo, can mean either "to see again" or "to look up."  The context clearly calls for the former, but perhaps Mark's gospel subtly conveys a deeper spiritual meaning to the "sight" that Bar-Timaeus seeks.

"I had heard of you by the hearing of the ear, but now my eye sees you," says Job in our Old Testament lesson, "therefore I despise myself, and repent in dust and ashes."  Somehow seeing God changes Job's whole outlook on his situation.  In Old Testament Hebrew, to hear ("shama`") is to learn and even to obey, but seeing ("ra'ah") is to encounter, to experience personally.  Job has spent 35 chapters discussing with his so-called friends the theological implications of his suffering and its potential remedies.  In the process, he explores some profound philosophical ground that will be further developed centuries later.  But in the end, what heals Job is not a discursive conclusion at all (much to the disappointment of many rationally-minded readers of the book).  Nor is it any practice or other remedial program that he might undertake.  Seeing God is what heals him, and seeing himself in relation to God.

Some interpreters of Job have summarized this conclusion as "you're nothing compared to God, so shut up."  But that interpretation is too shallow.  Yes, God is infinitely greater than we are, and we cannot presume to understand God's ways.  But God's greatness is not distancing -- God intimately cares for every creature.  In chapter 39, God reveals his transcendance through his immanence: "Do you know when the mountain goats give birth?  Do you observe the calving of the deer? ... Do you give the horse its might? ... Is it by your wisdom that the hawk soars... Is it at your command that the eagle mounts up and makes its nest on high?"  The message here is not just "see how ignorant you are" -- it is also "see how all-involved God is."  As Jesus said, not one sparrow falls to the ground without God's wise and loving attention.  In everything that has happened to Job, God is present, wise and compassionate. And now, Job has become aware of God's presence.

Jesus has time and attention for Bar-Timaeus.  He gives him the sight that he requests, and more: a restoration, and also a renewed vision from above.  Bar-Timaeus follows him in the way.

I mentioned before that the name "Timaeus" could be related to the Hebrew word for "defiled" (tema'), but there is another possibility.  During this period, some Jews considered it fashionable to take Greek and even Roman names.  Timaeus is a perfectly good Greek name -- it's the name of the title character of one of Plato's most influential dialogues.  It means "honored" or "valued."

May we clearly see how much God values each one of us, and may we value each other accordingly.
