Trinity Sunday

Readings: Isaiah 6:1-8, Psalm 29, Romans 8:12-17, John 3:1-17

In the year that King Uzziah died, Isaiah sees a vision of the Lord in which the seraphs cry "Holy, holy, holy, is the LORD of hosts.  The whole earth is full of his glory."  This verse is the original source (as far as we know) of the Trisagion (literally, "thrice holy") that has been a part of Christian liturgy since at least the early fifth century.  Why thrice?  Repetition of a word (a rhetorical device known as "epizeuxis") gives more force to the assertion than only once.  Three repetitions also mirrors the inherent strength of threeness.  The triangle is the strongest shape, because it distributes any force applied to it across all three of its sides.  Two points can describe a line, but it takes three to describe a plane.

On Friday I was at the cardiologist's office for a follow-up.  While waiting for the doctor, I noticed a diagram of a heart valve with three cusps -- the flaps that come together to close the valve.  Looking it up later, I found that most heart valves (except the mitral valve) are structured this way.  The cusps provide support for each other when they close together.

The Triquetra, or Trinity knot, is a Celtic symbol that early Celtic Christians brought forward from their pre-Christian religious heritage as an appropriate image of the Trinity.  You can't miss it's three-fold structure, yet it is impossible to say exactly where each third of the whole begins and ends.  Similar symbols also existed in Germanic paganism and even pre-Christian Japan.  At least some of the Celtic druids welcomed Christianity as a further revelation of their pre-existing beliefs partly because of the doctrine of the Trinity, for they already possessed a three-fold conception of the Divine.  Taliesin, a Welsh bard in the sixth century, boldly asserted that “Christ, the word from the beginning, was from the beginning our teacher, and we never lost his teaching. Christianity was in Asia a new thing; but never was [there] a time when the Druids of Britain held not its doctrine.”

The inherent strength of threeness inspired the early Anglican theologian Richard Hooker's metaphor for the sources of authority as a stool having three legs: scripture, tradition, and reason.  If any one of these isn't upright, the stool will collapse.  But if they support and complement each other, it will stand.  Unity in threeness is the source of its strength.

Back to Isaiah.  He sees the holiness and glory of the Lord, and what is his reaction?  It isn't "wow."  Or even a "heart" or a thumbs up.  He's terrified.  The word translated "holy" (Hebrew "qadhosh") carries the sense of purity and separation from what is common.  "Glory" (Hebrew "kbhodh") literally means "heavy."  Perhaps "weighty" carries some of the same sense in English.  When Isaiah looks at himself, he sees only how far short he falls from that vision.  "Woe is me!" he says, "for I am lost, for I am a man of unclean lips, and I live among a people of unclean lips."  The word translated "I am lost" here has a better translation in the King James, I think, where it says "I am undone."  The Hebrew word (nidhmeiti) is a passive verb, and could be even more literally translated as "I am silenced" -- with the idiomatic connotation of being destroyed.  But the literal meaning plays on the uncleanness of his lips -- he can't have anything worth saying at this juncture.  Silence is the only appropriate response.

But the seraph brings him a remedy: a hot coal from the altar for his lips.  The word "seraph" in Hebrew means "burning one," and that's his job here: to purge Isaiah's unclean lips so that he can become a spokesperson for the Holy One.

In our gospel lesson, Jesus tells Nicodemus about the need to be "redone" in order to "see the kingdom of God."  Our version translates "born from above" here, but in Greek there may be a double entendre: "anothen" can mean either "from above" or "again" (as in our English idiom "from the top").  Nicodemus plainly understands it in the second sense, asking if someone can really enter the womb a second time.  Here's where the double entendre shows it edge, because Jesus responds by describing the second birth as different from the first:  it is "by the water and by the Spirit" -- hence, from above.  In case you were wondering, this double meaning could have also worked in Aramaic, as shown by the Peshitta translation of the New Testament, which uses "men derish" (literally, "from the head" -- idiomatically "again" or "from above").  This might even be richer in Aramaic, because it echoes the word used for "beginning" in Genesis 1, thus hinting at the action of God the Creator.

"What is born of the flesh is flesh, and what is born of the Spirit is spirit," says Jesus.  "Spirit" in Greek, Hebrew, Aramaic, and even Latin can also mean "breath" or "wind," and Jesus plays on this double meaning to describe the freedom and inscrutability of those who have been remade of the Spirit.  In verse 16, we learn that this new type of life is the reason for Jesus' presence in the world.  God, though holy, does not want to remain separate from us, but wants instead to draw us into his holiness and glory.

This is the "spirit of adoption" that Paul speaks about in our Romans lesson.  We become "children of God and joint heirs with Christ" -- but not without suffering.  Like Isaiah, we must be purged of our uncleanness.  We must "put to death the deeds of the body" -- that is, anything that our ego holds onto to assert its separateness from God.  Like Christ on the cross, we must be emptied and die in order to live again and anew.  This hurts, but it's worth it.  For we gain the freedom to be who we were meant to be: nothing less than divine.

Threeness is strong in oneness.  The Trinity is how God is even stronger than a pure, separate, unapproachable diety.  Why? Because God is also infinitely strong in love.  The One is not alone, but embodies the relationship of the three.  And "God so loves the world", that even though God is holy, God in Christ comes to dwell with us, where we are, as one of us, to lead us back to God.  The Holy Spirit is God dwelling, not only with us, but in us -- inspiring us to grow in unity with God and with each other.  Three in One is only the beginning.  May God perfect the union with us and with all creation, and make all things holy, holy, holy.
