Proper 4, Sunday

Readings: Deuteronomy 5:12-15, Psalm 139, 2 Corinthians 4:5-12, Mark 2:23-3:6

The common theme across our readings today is the human body, the "vessel of clay" that is nevertheless "marvelously made," and the lessons we can learn from it. 

In our reading from Deuteronomy, the reason given for the sabbath is not the usual one (the six days of creation followed by a day of rest) but instead "so that your servants may rest as well as you."  It then goes on to remind its Israelite audience that the Lord delivered them from slavery, and so they should also let their slaves have a break once a week.  In other words, the sabbath is a vehicle for compassion, as limited as it might have been in a society that condoned slavery -- although maybe we could learn something from them about having compassion for "the resident alien among you."  The sabbath is presented here as compassion for the limitations of the body.

By the time of Jesus, the sabbath had become a legalistic trap.  Oh, it all started with good intentions, as the enforcement mentality always does.  After the Babylonian exile, and especially after the persecutions that led to the Maccabean revolt, many Jews ardently believed that the reason for all their past sufferings had been their failure to follow God's commandments.  In this they may have been right, but increasingly the definition of "follow God's commandments" became interpreted as "to the letter and beyond." It became necessary therefore to define the exact limits of what a person could legally do on the sabbath.  For example, the "sabbath day's journey" referred to in Acts 1 was defined by the rabbis as no more than 2000 cubits from one's home.  Joshua 3:4 had commanded that the people were to keep a distance of 2000 cubits between themselves and the ark of the covenant.  The rabbis reasoned that they therefore must have been able to walk 2000 cubits in order to reach the tabernacle for worship on the sabbath.  They also figured out how to build in a loophole: if you previously place some food within 2000 cubits of your home, you could walk there and call it a temporary residence.  Then you could walk up to another 2000 cubits from there.

The net result of all these detailed rules was that those who assiduously kept them could feel proud of their achievement, while also looking down on and persecuting those who did not.  The parable of the Pharisee and the Tax Collector in Luke 18 provides Jesus' perspective on that attitude.  In another story in Matthew 9, Jesus tells the Pharisees: "Go and learn what this means: ‘I desire mercy, and not sacrifice’" (quoting the prophet Hosea).

In today's Gospel lesson, the Pharisees are looking for ways to accuse Jesus of breaking the law of the sabbath.  First, they see his disciples eating grain as they walk through the fields.  This they consider reaping, which would be a type of work not allowed on the sabbath.  They are totally missing the point that the sabbath is supposed to provide relief for the body, not hardship.  To make this point, Jesus goes even further and reminds them of the story in 1 Samuel 21 in which David (their hero-king from whose descendents they expected the Messiah to come) eats the bread that was supposed to be dedicated to the Lord and only consumed by the priests, because his situation is desparate.  The Book of Samuel doesn't criticise this action.  Jesus uses this to argue that the law was made to benefit humans, not to enslave them.  In Matthew's version, he here repeats the quotation from Hosea: "I desire mercy, not sacrifice."

Next, the narrative provides another scene to drive this point further home.  Jesus enters the synagogue on the sabbath and sees the opportunity to heal someone.  This would be considered work by the Pharisees, and so forbidden on the sabbath.  But Jesus asks, "Is it lawful to do good or to do harm on the sabbath, to save life or to kill?"  He implies by this question that refusing to do good is the same as causing harm.  Refusing to save a life is the same as killing it.  The legalism of the Pharisees would choose that option, rather than to break their rules.  They would thwart the merciful intent of the sabbath law by observing it too strictly. Jesus weighs in on the other side by healing the man.  I desire mercy, and not sacrifice.  Compassion rather than achievement.

Our human bodies can teach us a lot about compassion.  The sufferings that are an inevitable part of our human condition help us to understand the suffering of others.  Their suffering also invites us to act compassionately.  Even if we can't cure their condition or solve their problem, we can still support them in some way.  If we approach someone with compassion, forgetting ourselves and focusing on their needs, then the way to act compassionately will become clear.  Sometimes just having someone to talk with can bring inner healing.  Our shared physical being thus provides a way for us to draw closer to one another, a step towards our ultimate destiny of union in Christ.

Our bodies can teach us about love.  Not only the sufferings, but also the joys of physicality can provide a context for opening our hearts to each other -- provided that we don't become so attached to earthly pleasures that we make them more important than the relationships that they support.  The purpose of all physical enjoyment should be to provide a way for us to extend hospitality and love to each other, rather than just a dopamine jolt for ourselves.

Our bodies can teach us humility, by imposing limits on what we can do.  Even the most strictly ascetic monastic must eat and sleep sometime, and in fact the monastic literature from early on warns against extending fasts and vigils too long, not only because the body can suffer harm but even more importantly because of the danger of adopting an achievement mindset that can lead to vainglory.  This danger is not limited to ascetics.  Athletes also sometimes push their bodies too far in the vain attempt to reach ever higher levels of achievement.  The Fitbit with its daily step goals and challenges provides the rest of us with the opportunity to embrace that same obsession. Even though our bodies can be conditioned to greater and greater endurance, they do have limits and they provide ever louder warnings as we draw near to those boundaries.  This equally applies to the mental and emotional stresses we inflict on ourselves and each other in pursuing all kinds of other goals.  We need to listen to our bodies to see when our great enterprises are offending our nature.  Ultimately, our bodies will die and return to the earth, putting a final period on all of our accomplishments.

"We have this treasure in clay jars," says Paul, "so that it may be made clear that this extraordinary power belongs to God and does not come from us."  What is this "treasure?"  What is this "extraordinary power?" In the previous verse, Paul gives the antecedent as "the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ."  What is this "glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ?"  Paul says further on that we are "carrying in the body the death of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may also be made visible in our bodies."  "The death of Jesus" -- humbled, emptied of self, crucified with him.  "The life of Jesus" -- filled with compassion and a love that never dies.  May it be so in us.
