Proper 10

Readings: Amos 7:7-15, Psalm 24, Ephesians 1:3-14, Mark 6:14-29

Amaziah, the priest of Bethel, confronts the prophet Amos and tells him to go away.  Amos had been prophesying against the northern kingdom of Israel, predicting that its king, Jeroboam II, would be killed and its people would be taken into exile.  This is more than Amaziah can take.  As priest of Bethel, Amaziah held a powerful position in the religious life of the whole nation.  Bethel and Dan were the two most important religious centers in the northern kingdom of Israel.  They worshipped Yahweh there, although not in a strictly orthodox fashion according to the prophets of the southern kingdom of Judah.  First of all, both Bethel and Dan had images of golden bulls that represented Yahweh, which was strictly forbidden by the Torah as we have it.  The south also promoted the idea that worship should only occur in Jerusalem, where the ark of the covenant was housed inside Solomon's temple.

Furthermore, Judah regarded the northern kingdom as politically somewhat illegitimate, having rebelled and split off from Judah around two hundred years before, under Jeroboam I.  I say "somewhat" because the tradition around the rebellion is mixed: through the prophet Ahijah, Yahweh directs Jeroboam I to rebel (I Kings 11), but soon condemns Jeroboam and his kingdom for setting up the altars at Bethel and Dan (I Kings 13).  Several coups ensued, but by the time of Jeroboam II the kingdom had extended its territories and enjoyed great prosperity through international trade.  Surely this was a sign of God's favor.

Before their encounter, Amaziah reported Amos' activities to the king.  These prophecies were treasonous and needed to be stopped.  Amos is from Tekoa, in Judah not far from Bethlehem and Jerusalem.  Probably he's a "fake news" prophet from the south, trying to shake confidence in this administration with his doom and gloom propaganda.  No doubt his ultimate aim is to turn the people's allegiance back to Jerusalem.  Yep, that must be it.  He's one of those paid prophets from Judah that have been stirring up trouble ever since the first Jeroboam's reign.

"Run off to Judah," he says to Amos.  "Collect your pay and do your prophesying there.  We don't want to hear your fake news around here anymore.  Bethel is the king's sanctuary, and a royal house."  Bethel is the best.  It's huge.  Amaziah's bringing the big guns -- invoking not only royal authority, but implicitly Divine favor as well.

Amos responds by denying that he is part of the prophetic profession.  He hasn't been trained in their schools.  He was just a shepherd and a fig-grower, but the Lord put a fire inside of him and made him speak the truth to this kingdom. "Prophet" isn't his identity -- but "prophesy" is his calling.

If we look through the prophecies of Amos, we can find very little trace of political motivation.  He doesn't bring up anything about the legitimacy of the northern kingdom, nor does he call for reunification.  He doesn't even confine his condemnations to Israel.  He has plenty of harsh words for all of Israel's neighbors as well, including the kingdom of Judah (2:4-5).  So what is his beef with Israel?  Looking back to chapter 2 we read:

For three transgressions of Israel,
    and for four, I will not revoke the punishment;
because they sell the righteous for silver,
    and the needy for a pair of sandals—
they who trample the head of the poor into the dust of the earth,
    and push the afflicted out of the way;
father and son go in to the same girl,
    so that my holy name is profaned;
they lay themselves down beside every altar
    on garments taken in pledge;
and in the house of their God they drink
    wine bought with fines they imposed.

This is almost entirely about enjoying excessive economic prosperity at the expense of the poor.  "Garments taken in pledge" would be collateral on a loan, which according to Exodus 22:26 should not even be kept overnight but should be returned by sunset out of compassion.  The people that Amos condemns are not only keeping them, they are using them in their worship of the God who told them to be compassionate.

And as for the claim that they have Yahweh on their side because of their religious observances, Amos has this word from the Lord in chapter 5:

I hate, I despise your festivals,
    and I take no delight in your solemn assemblies.
Even though you offer me your burnt offerings and grain offerings,
    I will not accept them;
and the offerings of well-being of your fatted animals
    I will not look upon.
Take away from me the noise of your songs;
    I will not listen to the melody of your harps.
But let justice roll down like waters,
    and righteousness like an ever-flowing stream.

This isn't about politics or religion, it's about justice with compassion.

Earlier in chapter 7, just before our reading, the Lord had given Amos visions of two proposed methods of punishing Israel: locusts and fire.  In both cases, Amos successfully pleaded for mercy and the Lord relented.  But at the beginning of our reading the Lord gives Amos a third vision: a plumb-line by a wall, to measure how upright it is.

Then the Lord said,

“See, I am setting a plumb line
    in the midst of my people Israel;
    I will never again pass them by"

In other words, if they don't straighten up now, it will be too late.

Not many years later, the Assyrians conquered the northern kingdom and led much of the population away captive.  That was the end of the kingdom of Israel.

In God's economy, the fate of a nation or a religious institution is not as important as the fate of the souls of its people.  If God has to destroy a nation's greatness in order to save its soul, that's what God will do -- just as God often does in our individual lives.  We may be about to witness that here in the United States of America.

The question for us is: how are we called to prophesy to these times?  I can't answer that question for anyone else and nobody should try to answer it for themselves without prayer and discernment, but for me at least I think it must take a form that calls for compassionate justice.  It must speak to America's heart, rather than to its political indigestion.  As long as the conversation keeps getting deflected from the gospel of love towards division, bitterness and hatred, we will never be able to stand upright.  May the compassionate God give us strength to stand.
