Third Sunday after Epiphany

Readings: Jonah 3:1-5,10, Psalm 62:6-14, I Corinthians 7:29-31, Mark 1:14-20

Our readings today are about repentance.  But the English word "repentance" falls short of capturing the ideas communicated here.  In English, "repent" has etymology and connotations around guilt and punishment, and while it is important for us to recognize and admit our failings, we are called to something greater.  A frequent Hebrew word is "shubh", which means to turn or to return.  Thus, the idea goes beyond self- flagellation to taking a different course of action.  In Greek, the usual term is "metanoia" -- literally, "after-thinking" or "to think differently".  When Jesus in our Gospel lesson preaches, "Repent and believe in the good news," he is calling us to change our minds for something better.

Our Old Testament lessons picks up in the middle of the Jonah story, right after Jonah has had a forcible change of path.  "This whole running from God thing just isn't working out, so OK God I get it.  I'll go (reluctantly) to Nineveh".  I identify with Jonah more than with just about any other Biblical character.  No matter how hard or how far I try to run, God keeps after me until I come back.  As my Brother Chris Shutz once said, "those Hounds of Heaven will hunt you down!"  I am finally beginning to learn to turn around earlier in the process -- whenever God says, "Don't make me get out the whale."

So Jonah goes to Nineveh and proclaims that the city will be destroyed in forty days.  He places no conditions on this doom.  He gives them no option for repentance. But they say "that doesn't sound good at all" (paraphrasing here) and they change their ways.  And then God becomes the third party in this story to change direction -- God decides not to destroy the city.

How can God switch plans?  Isn't God omniscient?  Truly, we can only describe God in terms that we can understand.  Our experience tells us that God is not just an impersonal force, but our minds tell us that God can't be limited to mere personhood as we understand it in ourselves.  So we can only speak about God in metaphors and paradoxes, knowing that our understanding will always be incomplete.  The Old Testament authors use anthropomorphism heavily, because a mighty ruler was the most powerful concrete metaphor they could find.  God changing his mind was, in fact, how they would have experienced this sequence of events, and so it was true for them.

Back to our Gospel lesson, Jesus calls the first four disciples.  He tells them that he will make them into fishers for people.  There is a parallel here with the Jonah story.  God sent the fish to retrieve Jonah from the sea.  The sea is often a symbol of chaos in Biblical (and other ancient Semitic) myth, and the fish brings Jonah back to terra firma and to the will of God.  Now Jesus is saying that his disciples will have that role.  Instead of fetching fish from the sea, they will bring people out of their chaos and back to God.

How do they respond?  They literally drop everything and follow him.  There is no five-year plan here.  His value proposition is pretty sketchy.  There are no safety net assurances.  But something about this man speaks to them in a way that they immediately recognize as the One to follow.  They change their way of life and eventually their way of thinking in order to dedicate themselves to the only thing that matters.

This is essentially what Paul is advising in our Epistle lesson.  Ironically, it's easy for us to get sidetracked into the details of what Paul is talking about (married people, act is if you aren't married?).  Notice how Paul doesn't tell those who have dealings with the world to necessarily stop having dealings with the world, but rather to act "as if" they didn't.  In other words, stop drawing your identity from those roles and focus your heart and mind on the one role that matters:  being a disciple of Christ.

For God alone my soul in silence waits
Truly, my hope is in him

"For God alone" the Psalmist says.  Nothing else provides what we seek, so don't look for it anywhere else.

"My soul".  In Hebrew (nephesh), as in Greek (psyche), this word means much more than the standard English connotation of "our immaterial part".  In Genesis chapter 2 when God breathes into the clay, man becomes "nephesh chayah" (a living soul).  This involves the body as well as the mind, heart, spirit, and any other part of what I call "me."

"In silence."  This word in the Hebrew ("domiy") has the sense of coming to a full stop.  All of me, body, mind, and everything else must cease activity to await the word and work of God.  My prayers are often "help me with this!" or "what do I do about that?" or "speak, Lord" -- but if I don't follow through on "for your servant is listening" then I won't be able to hear.  Not only the answers that I seek, but also God's unexpected call (don't make God get out the whale).  Beyond that and far more importantly, we need to hear the humanly unspeakable Word of God that enters us and transforms us.

A daily contemplative practice is one way in which to bring first your body, then your mind and heart, into that silent place where you can hear God.  I highly recommend it.

"My hope is in him."  This word that has been here translated as "hope" is one of my favorite Hebrew words.  The root, "qavah" is often translated "wait" as in the many Psalms that advise us to "wait upon the LORD", or Isaiah 40:31 "They that wait upon the LORD will renew their strength".  As with all Hebrew words, this one started out as a concrete word - in this case, for "cord".  A cord that is strong enough not to give way.  Even if you have to hang on for a long time, it will hold you.

My oldest son, Sterling, loves rock-climbing.  He told me recently about a climb in which he had to rappel a couple of hundred feet through a space in which he could not reach a wall.  He said he looked up and realized how dependent he was on his rope for his very life.  If it snapped, he would be dead.  Then he realized that that was almost always the case when rappeling, because even when you can plant your feet you often wouldn't be able to hold on if your rope let go.  Being able to place your feet against something gives you a false sense of security, when in fact it is only the rope that holds you.

So it is in our life.  We grasp things -- our money, our job, our home, our family -- seeking reassurance, but truly the only One who holds us from falling is God.

That we may change our thinking and turn our ways toward Holy Silence and complete reliance on Christ, may God grant us grace.  Amen.
