Readings: Jeremiah 31:31-34, Psalm 51:1-13, Hebrews 5:5-10, John 12:20-33

What is sin?

Etymologically, both the Hebrew word for sin ("chata'") and the Greek ("hamartano") mean "to miss".  We can think of an archer shooting an arrow at a target, and falling short of -- or perhaps overshooting -- the mark.  Confucius said, "In archery we have something like the way of the superior man. When the archer misses the center of the target, he turns round and seeks for the cause of his failure in himself."  I find it interesting that the English word "sin" appears to come from a word meaning "it is so" -- thus, confessional.  When we miss the mark, we must look to ourselves and admit that we need a change.

Our psalmist has reached that point.  "I know my transgressions" he says in verse 3, "and my sin is ever before me."  What did the psalmist do, or fail to do?

The attribution at the beginning of this Psalm, which is undoubtedly later than the psalm itself, makes the author David, after he has been confronted by the prophet Nathan about his affair with Bathsheba and his arranging the death of her husband.  There are a number of reasons to doubt this attribution, but for me the most glaring one always was the line "against you only have I sinned."  What about Uriah?  What about Bathsheba, who had little choice in the matter?

Closer inspection of the Hebrew text, though, makes that objection less clear.  The single Hebrew word that is translated "against you only" is more literally "to your isolation."  Translators ever since the Septuagint have interpreted this to mean that God is alone in bearing the effects of the psalmist's sin, but I wonder if this isn't more about the psalmist feeling the alienation from God that his sin has created.  He is no longer one with God.

"For behold, you look for truth deep within me, and will make me understand wisdom secretly" (verse 7).  The word translated as "look for" here actually means "desire."  This isn't about inspecting and finding (or not), it's about wanting and creating.  What does God desire?  Truth.  The Hebrew word "'emeth" carries so much more weight than our modern idea of truth as "that which is the case."  In Hebrew, it is intimately tied to the concept of faithfulness -- in English we preserve this somewhat in the phrase "being true to" a personor a cause.

When we seek our own way, rather than God's way, then we are untrue to God and alienate ourselves from God.  What does that mean, to seek our own way?  It means that we have other priorities, and those priorities lead us off the path that God has for us.

What is the path that God has for us?  Nothing short of union with God.  This, of course, is also our greatest possible identity.  We miss that mark when we accept any lesser identity as the goal.  Being famous, successful, wealthy, knowledgeable, witty, admired, virtuous, helpful, or even known for our humility are all identities that fall short of God, and that can distract us from the true path.  It's not about who you are in this world or in your own mind, it's about being one with God in love.  And that means forgetting your lesser self, and leaving it behind.

So we see that sin isn't primarily about its external effects -- it is rather about the damage we do to our own souls.  Of course, it is impossible to do harm to others without inflicting even greater harm on ourselves.  God is love, and God desires the union of all creatures, so failing to love others is straying from the path towards God.  When we act selfishly, we are feeding that lesser self at the expense of developing into our greater self.  It should be clear from this why God is so willing to forgive sin.  God wants us to return to the true path.

In our Gospel lesson Jesus asks, "what should I say -- 'Father, save me from this hour'?  No, it is the reason that I have come to this hour."  Jesus clearly saw that his path did not lead to a comfortable self, but rather to obedience: "Father, glorify your name."  The writer of Hebrews says in our epistle that Jesus prayed "to the one who was able to save him from death, and he was heard because of his reverent submission."  He was heard, it says, because he did not ask to be spared.  Rather, "he learned obedience through what he suffered."  He could see a bigger picture: "unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains just a single grain; but if it dies, it bears much fruit."  Just as in the wilderness temptations, so here, Jesus foregoes all lesser goals in order be his truest self, which is God.  And Jesus calls us to that path also: "those who hate their life in this world will keep it for eternal life."  Eternal life is much more than not ceasing to exist -- it is to become our true self in Christ.

Shedding the lesser self is not easy.  We must first see it for what it is.  We are so ready to make every false image of ourselves into an idol.  We fall down before it, and cling to it as if it alone could save us.  Humility is seeing yourself as you truly are.  Not greater, but also not overshooting the mark with a false humility.  The process of growing in humility often feels like being torn down or lowered, yet St. Benedict says that "we descend by exaltation and ascend by humility" (Regula 7:7).  Our false, lesser self weighs us down, while the freedom of letting it go brings us closer to God.

This is the wisdom that God will make us understand secretly (verse 7 of our Psalm).  This is the law that God will write upon our hearts.  God must do this work in us, we can't do it on our own.  If we could, that would only be yet another achievement of the lesser self -- the self that is not God.  God alone can create a clean heart and renew a right spirit within us.  May it be so.
