Easter 3

Readings: Acts 3:12-19, Psalm 4, I John 3:1-7, Luke 24:36b-48

I hope you'll forgive me for taking a little detour outside of orthodoxy today.  I promise I'll return you safely at the end.

On the train to New York last February I found myself engaged in conversation with an interesting and intelligent young woman named Kelley.  From the first Maryland stop all the way to Penn Station, we talked about many shared interests.  When the topic inevitably turned to faith, she asked me to read the following short story, which I easily found online because it has remained a perennial Reddit favorite ever since it was first published by Andy Weir.

(Here is where Br. Eckhart pads his homily with someone else's content:  http://www.galactanet.com/oneoff/theegg_mod.html)

There are plenty of details in this story to question or disagree with.  But this little myth keeps finding its way back into my consciousness because it eloquently voices several truths.

The purpose of life is to form us into the likeness of God.  Nothing is terribly important for its own sake, including life and death -- it's important only in how it shapes us and draws us closer to God.  We are being formed for union with God and therefore for union with each other.

We are all one, and what we do to one another we do to ourselves at a very deep level of our being.  If we could live into that, then we would truly love our neighbors our ourselves.

(Read I John 3:1-7)

Sin is not about breaking the rules, and forgiveness is so much more than getting a pass.  Sin is anything that distracts us from our purpose of union with God and with each other.  God gladly forgives us, because God wants nothing more than for us to return to the path of love.  Far from being an excuse for sin, grace is God's action of freeing us from our addiction to sin -- our obsession with all of the things that distract us from true love, which is union with God.

We are children of God.  We can't even conceive of what we will become when we see Christ as Christ is, God as God is, ourselves as we truly are in Christ.
