My sister gave me these three gifts for Christmas.  They match the offerings that the gospel of Matthew says the wise men brought to Jesus.

The first is gold.  In this incarnation, they have suspended 23-carat gold flakes in a liquid inside this glass ball, perhaps to make the gift large enough yet not too expensive.  Gold doesn't tarnish, and it's an excellent electrical conductor.  See how it glitters!  The word "gold" probably comes from a Proto-Indo-European root that meant "shiny."  The Greek word used in Matthew, chrysos, may have been borrowed from a Phoenician/Hebrew word meaning "ornament" (haruz).  From ancient times to the present, gold has been used as in all sorts of ornaments.  That made it valuable also as a medium for exchange, which in turn made it something collected by kings.  The wise men in our story present it to Jesus as a recognition that he is the king that they have been seeking.  Jesus turns out to be a king like no other.  Rather than seeking to rule countries and governments, he seeks to rule our hearts, minds, and souls.

The second offering is frankincense.  As the name implies, it is a type of incense, and its scent is very beautiful when burned.  Its name means "noble incense," showing how the name of the Franks came to be more broadly applied.  In Greek it is called libanos, which again is probably borrowed from Semitic languages.  Although it is the name of Lebanon, it comes from a root meaning "white" (laban) -- and as you can see, frankincense is white.  Because of its heavenly odor, it has been used in worship from ancient times until the present day.  Its presentation to Jesus recognizes that he is our great high priest, and also divine.

The third gift is myrrh.  Myrrh can also be used as incense. It has a darker aroma than that of frankincense.  Its name, in both English and Greek, derives from the Hebrew word for "bitter" (mar), which is also the root of Mary's name.  Because it repels worms, myrrh was used in ancient burials.  For Jesus, it signifies his mortality and his suffering.  He lived and suffered and died as a human so that he could truly be with us.

We don't know how much of Jesus' life the magi were able to foresee.  Their gifts became prophetic.  "Gold as to a king, myrrh as to a mortal, frankincense as to a God" wrote Origen, the great theologian of the third century.

Meister Eckhart, whose name I took when I became a monk, asked "what good is it if Jesus was born in a stable in Bethlehem is he is not born in me every day?" If Christ is indeed born in us, if we are indeed Christ-bearers, then these gifts are for us as well.

First, the myrrh.  Mortality and suffering are common to us all.  This is where Christ first meets us, in our suffering.  But Christ calls us to even more: we must take up our cross and follow him, and we must be crucified with Christ so that the life we live is no longer ours but Christ living in us.  This means losing attachment to all the things that distract us from union with God.  Suffering is indeed a wonderful gift, if we learn how to receive it.

But then comes the gold: the blessings we receive from God.  If we have been crucified with Christ, we also partake in his resurrection and reign with him.  We are joint heirs in Christ's kingdom.  This isn't just a future hope.  It also applies to the joy we can find in every moment of our walk in this life (but beware of imitations).

Best of all, the frankincense.  Being made one with God, we too become divine.  "God became man so that man could become God," said Athanasius.  We put off our old, small self and become our true self: our identity that is hidden in Christ.

God is drawing all things into divine union, but that work is far from complete.  The whole creation groans and suffers the birth pains of its own deliverance.  God is making us into the body of Christ to do Christ's work in the world.  We are to bring these gifts to others.

First, our gold.  We must share our material wealth with those less fortunate.  But we should not stop there.  If we do not use that opportunity to make a connection with the recipient, then we have wasted the better part of our offering.  Eye to eye and hand to hand, giving is more about love than it is about effecting any particular outcome.  Our spiritual treasure means so much more than our wordly goods, although often the latter can act as a vehicle for sharing the former.

But we are called to even deeper giving.  The myrrh.  Mourn with those who mourn.  Weep with those who weep.  Comfort one another, and bear each other's burdens.  We must enter into the suffering of our fellow inhabitants of this life, and we must pray for grace to develop empathy for those whose suffering we do not share or even understand.  This is where Christ met us, and this is where we can bring Christ to the world.

Finally, the frankincense. We hope and pray that we will be able to draw others into sharing our priesthood in Christ, and ultimately our divinization as well.  But we can only offer that gift in all humility, allowing God to draw them in whatever way God sees fit.  Did God entice you with any rigid formula for salvation?  How many of us came to Christ in spite of religion?  Don't expect another's path to match your own, but open doors for them to find the way that is meant for them.

Jesus said, "if you have done it for the least of these, you have done it for me."  And so we come full circle.  When we bear these gifts into the world, we join the magi in offering them to Christ.  May it be so.
