Proper 19 (St. Ninian)

Readings: Proverbs 1:20-33, Psalm 19, James 3:1-12, Mark 8:27-38

"'Tis the gift to be simple," says the old Shaker hymn.  Yet here in our Proverbs reading, Wisdom asks, "How long, O simple ones, will you love being simple?" and towards the end of the chapter she adds "For waywardness kills the simple, and the complacency of fools destroys them."  The remedy that Wisdom offers is "Give heed to my reproof; I will pour out my thoughts (literally, spirit) to you; I will make my words known to you."

The simplicity extolled in the hymn and the simplicity that Wisdom execrates must be two different kinds of simplicity.  The Hebrew word used in Proverbs is "pethi" and may derive from the word for "open" -- conjuring the image of a house left wide open, and thus easily robbed -- or in the case of the mind, easily fooled.  Once again, this metaphor differs greatly from our modern notion of open-mindedness, which is more about being able to entertain a diverse visitation of thoughts, while reserving the ability to discern those of ill intent and politely show them the door, learning something from them in the process.  No, the "open" or "simple" mind in Proverbs is more like the parable of Jesus in Luke 11 wherein a demon that has been cast out returns to find the mind open and empty, and so not only inhabits it himself but also calls in seven of his closest fiends as roommates.

Even though the Hebrew word "pethi" sounds like the English word "petty," the two probably have no etymological connection ("petty" comes via French from the Late Latin "pitinnus" meaning "small", and nobody is sure where that originated -- perhaps from a Celtic word meaning "part" or "piece").  Nevertheless, the simplicity that our Proverbs lesson belittles could be characterized, I think, by pettiness:  taking too small a view of things, and failing to see the big picture.

When Wisdom says in verse 27 that she will mock "when panic strikes you like a storm, and your calamity comes like a whirlwind," I can't help but take her metaphor literally and think of the increasing intensity of hurricanes, their connection to climate change, the short-sighted and small-minded selfishness of our past willingness to exchange the future of our planet for transitory wealth and convenience, and our persistent denials that there's anything wrong with this picture.

In our Epistle lesson, James uses the image of strong winds driving a ship that can nevertheless be steered by a small rudder to illustrate the power of the tongue over our lives.  A thoughtless word can damage a relationship in ways that can take years to heal, if healing comes at all.  James expends four verses on asking how is it possible that someone can bless God and curse another human being with the same mouth.  "Does a spring pour forth from the same opening both fresh and brackish water?  Can a fig tree, my brothers and sisters, yield olives, or a grapevine figs?  No more can salt water yield fresh."  All of these metaphors represent impossibilities, so we are left to conclude that either the tongue is able to be almost supernaturally unruly, or that it truly is not possible to bless God and curse someone else -- either the curse or the blessing is not genuine.

Later in the same chapter, James says, "But if you have bitter envy and selfish ambition in your hearts, do not be boastful and false to the truth. Such wisdom does not come down from above, but is earthly, unspiritual, devilish. For where there is envy and selfish ambition, there will also be disorder and wickedness of every kind. But the wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, willing to yield, full of mercy and good fruits, without a trace of partiality or hypocrisy." Selfishness is not the wisdom of God.  It's too small.  It's petty.

We are called to greater things.  In our Gospel lesson, Jesus says "If any want to become my followers, let them deny themselves and take up their cross and follow me.  For those who want to save their life will lose it, and those who lose their life for my sake, and for the sake of the gospel, will save it."  If I try to hold on with clenched fists to the small piece of the universe that I call "me," along with the other small pieces that I call "mine," then I will ultimately lose all of them with the death of this body.  Worse yet, my protectionism will prevent me from opening personal borders to others and to God, thus limiting my existence to that small, evil world of self.  If, on the other hand, I release my grasp on all that is transitory, then I am free to embrace that which is eternal.  Not only in the next life, but right here and now.  Love, joy, our larger self in Christ, and the knowledge that we are all really one.  That is the wisdom of simplicity advocated by the old Shaker song:

'Tis the gift to be simple, 'tis the gift to be free
'Tis the gift to come down where we ought to be,
And when we find ourselves in the place just right,
'Twill be in the valley of love and delight.
