Third Sunday in Lent

Readings: Exodus 20:1-17, Psalm 19, 1 Corinthians 1:18-25, John 2:13-22

An internet meme from a couple of years ago said, "The next time someone asks you 'What would Jesus do?' remind them that flipping tables and chasing people with a whip is not out of the question."  While this meme may have  been designed to ridicule Christianity for its inconsistencies, we who follow Christ can take a lesson from it.  We should be wary of attempting to tame Christ and put him into a sanitized box.  God doesn't exist only to promote good behavior.

Why did Jesus drive the merchants and money-changers from the temple?  He certainly heated up his conflict with the religious authorities by doing so.  What was the source of that conflict?

Conflicts over religion, politics, and social institutions often feed on differences of perspective.  Two parties look at the same thing, but they each see something different.  The current conflict in Palestine presents one of the most stark modern-day examples.  Both sides feel justified in trying to defend their homeland from the aggressor.  There is one word that succinctly expresses this dissonance:  Hamas, the name of the Palestinian organization that currently runs Gaza. "Hamas" is a word in both Arabic and Hebrew, from their common Semitic ancestry.  In Arabic, it means "strength", "rigor", or "enthusiasm for a cause".  In Hebrew, it means "violence".  So what sounds laudable in one language sounds deplorable in the other.

Let's explore the point of view of Jesus' observers.  A devout Jew, wandering through the Court of the Gentiles, might well wonder what had gotten into this Galilean named Yeshua bar-Yosef.  The merchants were not in the sacred part of the temple, they were in the outer court where anyone could go.  And what they sold were animals for the sacrifice: cattle and sheep for the wealthy, and doves for the poor.  People came from all around to sacrifice at the temple in Jerusalem, and they didn't want to bring their livestock with them.  Besides, many people by this time had abandoned the agrarian lifestyle of their ancestors and would not have owned any livestock to sacrfice.  The money-changers allowed worshippers to exchange their usual Roman currency for the Tyrian shekel, which was the only money allowed for use in the temple.  These people all provided a valuable service, helping the faithful to keep the ancient law in these modern times.  It was far more useful to the liturgy of the sanctuary than, for example, a gift shop in the narthex.

Why, then, is Jesus driving them out?  This self-styled prophet of questionable lineage, from Nazareth of all places, who doesn't even keep the sabbath rigorously (at least, not the way our scribes have said we should) -- who does he think he is, attacking our institutions of worship?  You can see why they ask him for his credentials later in our reading, why further in the gospel of John they conclude that Jesus is demon-possessed, and why the authorities begin to plan how to imprison and kill him.

Why does Jesus drive out the merchants and money-changers?  In Matthew's account, Jesus quotes Isaiah and Jeremiah: "My house shall be called a house of prayer, but you have made it a den of robbers."  Does Jesus object to the profit that these entrepreneurs are taking on their merchandise and exchange?  That might be part of it, but I think we need to go deeper.  Perhaps it was all the hustle and bustle of commerce within the temple preceincts, even if not within the temple itself.  We are reminded of the latter chapters of the book of Ezekiel, wherein Ezekiel sees a vision of the new temple and is given instructions about minute details of how people are even to enter and exit -- and the over-arching theme is that it all must be holy.  In chapter 45, the whole district around the temple is to be holy.  So perhaps Jesus sees even the Court of the Gentiles as a place where commerce should not take place.

But I think we can go even deeper.  The original sacrifical laws were given to a people who were largely agrarian, so the prescribed offerings could come from their own possessions.  The offering to God was supposed to be a sacrifice of self, not a business transaction.  Ironically, in their rigorous attempt to keep the letter of the Law, the religious establishment had largely killed its spirit.  Worship had become something you could buy and check off your shopping list, rather than something into which you poured your life, your soul.

When the Jews ask Jesus for a sign of his authority, he gives them a total non sequitur: "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up."  Now we know he is crazy.  Even if he could miraculously restore it in three days, we're not going to tear down the temple just to prove a point!

John tells us that Jesus was speaking about the temple of his body.  This, of course, makes his response even more disconnected from the question.  Or does it?

In our epistle reading, Paul writes about the contrast between the wisdom of this world and the wisdom of God.  "For Jews demand signs amd Greeks desire wisdom, but we proclaim Christ crucified, a stumbling block to Jews and foolishness to Gentiles, but to those who are the called, both Jews and Greeks, the power of God and the wisdom of God."  This world wants proof -- proof constructed according to the rules of what our current age considers authoritative.  In the twenty-first century, that means a materialistic, causal demonstration.  But Jesus gives us instead a mystical sign.

The sacrifice in the temple was supposed to be, from the beginning, a self-emptying; a giving of oneself to God.  Jesus fulfilled this call by emptying himself, not only in his life, but even moreso in his death.  We are called to enter into that same self-emptying.  We are to be crucified with Christ.  Anything in us that we hold onto as "ours" needs to be placed on the altar -- and nailed to the cross.  When we die to self, and our old nature is crucified, then we can be raised with him into new life.  So it is a true sign that Jesus gives us in his body.  We must be purified in spirit in order to worship God with our whole being.  Therefore, the compartmentalization and trivialization of our spirituality into something that we can check off our list after doing certain things must be driven out.  The whole temple precinct, our whole lives, must be dedicated to God.  May God give us grace so to do.
