Readings: Genesis 9:8-17, Psalm 25:1-9, I Peter 3:18-22, Mark 1:9-15

Appropriately for the First Suday in Lent, our Psalm for today pleads in verses 6-7:

Remember not the sins of my youth and my transgressions;
 remember me according to your love
 and for the sake of your goodness, O Lord.

Gracious and upright is the Lord;
 therefore he teaches sinners in his way.

This tells us that God is ready to forgive and work with sinners. But then we look up to verse 2 and we see:

Let none who look to you be put to shame;
 let the treacherous be disappointed in their schemes.

This is a Hebrew parallelism that appears to draw a sharp distinction between those who look to the Lord and and those who are treacherous.  There's a sense of "us and them" here.  Why aren't "they" candidates for forgiveness, while "we" get a pass for our sins?

This, of course, is a superficial reading.  We need a deeper one, that we can apply to our life. In the monastic tradition, the "enemies" of the Psalms are taken, not as other people, but as the demons with which we wrestle.  By demons, we mean the psychological processes that keep us from being what God wants us to be.  They are the "tapes" playing in our head, the attachments to things that we think are indispensable, and the false images that we have of ourselves.

The words that this version loosely translates in the second half of verse 2 are more literally in the Hebrew, "They shall be ashamed who cloak themselves in vain."  The "cloaking" may be used here figuratively as treacherousness, as in "cloak and dagger", but I think this may have a broader application: those who try to disguise who they are and what they're up to.  It turns out that we are not only those who look to the Lord, we are also the ones who try to hide from others, from ourselves, and even from God.  This, of course, is in vain.  And how will we be put to shame?  By being exposed.  In that sense, the two stiches of ths verse become less antithetical and more synonymous.  We pray to God to expose our falsehood, even as we look to God.  God's wrath is also God's mercy.

The remainder of the Psalm indicates that God doesn't just forgive and forget.  God teaches us and guides us forward.  In verse 8:

He guides the humble in doing right
 and teaches his way to the lowly.

In the monastic tradition, humility is about knowing yourself as you truly are, and offering that up to God.  All fake self-images, whether complimentary or not, must be released.  God continually helps us to peel those layers away, to arrive at our true identity, which is in Christ.

Our Old Testament reading is set right after the flood.  God has just destroyed all living creatures except for a remnant preserved in the ark.  Now he is telling Noah that he won't do that again.  In fact, he takes his bow, with which he shoots the arrows of lightning, and sets it in the cloud, so that when he brings the cloud he will see the bow as a sort of divine sticky-note to remind him not to cover the earth with a flood.

Of course, what I just said is again a superficial reading of the passage.  For the original hearers, the rainbow is more of a reminder to *them* that the destruction is not and never will be total.  In fact, it is a new beginning.  In our day, we can see ourselves as both the inhabitants of the ark, and also all that died in the flood.  That in us which threatens to destroy us must be wiped out.  This process can often be very painful -- it can seem like the world is ending.  But the rainbow reminds us that we will not be utterly destroyed, and that this is only the beginning of the next step that God has in store for us.  God's wrath is God's mercy.

The Epistle of Peter picks up this theme.  Peter says that the flood prefigures baptism.  As the flood washed away the evil in the world, so baptism "saves you -- not as a removal of dirt from the body, but as an appeal to God for a good conscience."  Wait, what?  Are we whistling for Jiminy Cricket now?  Is our redemption only about putting our sins in the past and not having to worry about them any more?  This also needs a deeper reading.  The word translated as "conscience" here is in Greek "syneideseos" -- literally, "seeing together" as in seeing a synthesized or complete view of things.  So once again we return to radical honesty.  This is the gateway towards allowing God to shape us into God's image, by releasing the lesser image of ourselves that we doggedly hold onto.

In our Gospel lesson, after Jesus' baptism, he is driven by the Spirit into the wilderness with the wild beasts, where he is tempted by Satan and then ministered to by angels.  The wilderness and the wild beasts are about letting go of merely human concerns and returning to one's natural state.  This provides the clarity for doing battle with the Prince of Demons.  As we said above, demons are our own haywire psychological processes, and Satan represents the worst of all: pride and vainglory.  From the other gospel accounts we learn that Jesus is offered an image of himself as powerful, highly favored, and in control.  To embrace that image is to worship Satan.  Rather than coming out of the desert as a military or political leader, or even as a wonder-working TV evangelist, Jesus chooses the path of humility and obedience.  The other roles continued to be offered to him throughout his ministry, but he consistently chose the path of mercy and humility instead.  

The angels waited on him.  We don't know exactly what that means, but I think it indicates that after overcoming the false self, a deeper and richer path awaits.  Meister Eckhart says, "It is not due to God's justice or severity, that He demands much from us, rather it comes from His great bounty, for He wants the soul to be capacious, so as to hold the largesse He is ready to bestow."

In this season of Lent, we discipline our bodies.  Not in order to prove how religious we can be, or to earn anything from God.  Rather, like Jesus going into the wilderness, we seek to remove the distractions from our lives so that we can do battle with our demons and open ourselves to God's ministering angels..

God stretches our souls, and that can be painful.  But the goal is not our destruction. It is to make us grow into what God has in store for us -- which is nothing short of divinization.  God's wrath is God's mercy.  May God grant us grace to receive it.
