Proper 12

Readings: Genesis 18:20-32, Psalm 138, Colossians 2:6-19, Luke 11:1-3

"May the words of my mouth, and the meditation of all our hearts, be acceptable in your sight, O Lord, our strength and our redeemer."

That prayer I just prayed is based on the last verse of Psalm 19, a truly beautiful psalm.  I like to quote the psalms in prayer, because they were the liturgical prayers of Jesus' time.  They can be sublime, and they can be horrific, but the one thing they all share is that they lay it all out before God -- all of the joy, sorrow, anger, fear, frustration, awe, triumph, love, and peace of the life lived before God -- presented in the context of the theologically messy humanity of their authors.

Prayers can take many forms: petitions and intercessions are the kinds of prayer in which we ask God for something, and these may be the most common.  But there are also prayers of praise and thanksgiving, and of lamentation -- when we don't even know what to ask for but just need to grieve before God.  Perhaps less familiar, contemplative prayer is when we enter into silence and simply wait for God.

In our Old Testament lesson, Abraham is interceding for the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah.  The Lord has just told Abraham that he is going to see whether the inhabitants are as sinful as he has heard.  Abraham rightly infers that the Lord is planning to destroy the cities, in one of which his nephew Lot is living.  So Abraham looks for an angle to get God to have mercy.  He appeals to God's sense of justice by pointing out that there might be fifty righteous people there, and of course the Lord would never destroy the good with the wicked!  God agrees.  Abraham then tries to negotiate him down on that fifty, and gets all the way down to ten before the Lord walks out of the conversation.

We're tempted by this story to think of Abraham as a wily wheeler-dealer.  Perhaps we might even model our prayers on this exchange, and seek to make a deal with God in order to get what we want. 

A different side of Abraham comes out in two other stories from Genesis.  Earlier, in chapter 14, Abraham pursues the kings who had defeated these same cities, and he not only defeats them but even recovers all the people and property they had taken.  The king of Sodom gives Abraham the opportunity to keep all of the property that he wants, if he'll only release the people.  Abraham takes nothing for himself.  Later, in chapter 23 after the death of his wife Sarah, Abraham seeks to buy a burial place for her from Ephron the Hittite.  Ephron responds with the standard opening for a negotiation, saying first that he gladly gives it to Abraham but then sliding in an outrageous price at the end, expecting Abraham to come back with a counter-offer.  Abraham doesn't haggle, though -- instead he just pays the full price.

Why is Abraham willing to play hardball with God, but not with humans?  In both of the human encounters, the potential object involved his own material possessions.  In the case of the destruction of the cities, it was about compassion for others.

I'm fond of quoting Meister Eckhart, a fourteenth century Dominican mystic whose name I took when became a vowed monastic.  Meister Eckhart says:

Know that when you seek anything of your own, you will never find God, because you do not seek God purely. You are seeking something along with God, and you are acting just as if you were to make a candle out of God in order to look for something with it. Once one finds the things one is looking for, one throws the candle away. This is what you are doing.

In Meister Eckhart's theology, the best prayer is the prayer that seeks only God, pure and simple.  Everything else must follow from that, or else it is a distraction from the path to union with God.  In Abraham's case, his prayers for Sodom and Gomorrah aligned with God's will and with becoming like God, because God is compassionate.

The disciples asked Jesus how to pray.  Apparently, John the Baptist had given instructions about prayer to his disciples (which, unfortunately, we no longer possess) and so Jesus’ disciples want to get his take on it.  Jesus starts with:

Father, hallowed be your name.
Your kingdom come.

Matthew's version adds "your will be done, on earth as in heaven."  The form of these lines is that of petition: "make this happen."  But as petitions they are redundant in the extreme.  It's not like God needs to be reminded to make God's name holy, or to make sure that God's will actually happens.  No, these are not requests for God to fulfill, even though they're expressed in those terms.  They are rather a way of stating our desire that these things will happen.  In other words, we're aligning our wills with God's will.

Later in our Gospel lesson, Jesus says, "Ask, and it will be given you; search, and you will find; knock, and the door will be opened for you."  When Mother Helen preached on this passage this morning, I thought to myself, "I have something to say about this passage," but I didn't get a chance to share it.  I mentioned later that I would be coming here to St. John's today, and Mother Helen said, "Good, you can preach."  What I had to say was:  Jesus didn't specify that what you receive will be exactly in the form of what you asked for, nor that what you find will be what you thought you were searching for, nor that what's behind the door you want opened is what you expect.  Like when I said, "I have something to say about that" and suddenly found myself launched into a pulpit.  Jesus says that when your child asks you for a fish you won't give them a snake instead -- but in many of our prayers we're more like a child asking for a Big Mac with fries and a shake.  God often gives us something much more nutritious, even though we might not like it as well at the moment.  Notice that in Luke's version, the prayer that the Father will readily grant is when we ask for the Holy Spirit.  Again, it's about aligning ourselves with the path towards union with God.

"Thy will be done" is more than just throwing up our hands in surrender.  Yes, it is about surrender, but not just surrendering the outcome -- it's a full surrender of our wills.  That means that when we say "thy will be done" we might receive as an answer, "OK, here's what that means, now go do it."  We cannot use "I'll pray for you" as an escape from service to God and to others (I stole that from Mother Helen’s sermon).  This is also where intercessory prayer has a legitimate place:  when it is about bringing the hurts and needs of others before God in all their human messiness out of compassion, genuinely seeking a way for them through their crises, and being willing to put our own lives out there to help.  In that way we are like Abraham praying for Sodom and Gomorrah, and in that way we are imitators of Christ.  May it be so.

