Proper 15

Readings: Isaiah 5:1-7, Psalm 82, Hebrews 11:29-12:2, Luke 12:49-56

In three of our readings for today, we find a common theme: sometimes that which has been held as holy must be destroyed.

Psalm 82 presents us with a picture of an ancient pantheon.  The gods have come together in council.  In this mythos, which is attested in other parts of the Old Testament as well as in other ancient literature, each nation had its own god.  The fortunes of nations depended on the actions of their respective gods and the interactions between them.  Over all the other gods reigned the high God, El -- although in the Canaanite literature his ability to establish his authority was sometimes open to question.  In our Psalm, he stands forth in the assembly and rebukes the other gods because they are not maintaining justice.  He tells them that they should stop being partial to the wicked, and instead defend the weak, the poor, and the orphans.  Then he decides in verse 5 that these gods are unable to understand or act on his call for universal justice, and so they have to go.  "You are all gods, and all children of the Most High.  Nevertheless you shall die like mortals, and fall like one of the princes."  The Psalmist approves of with this proposal, and ends the poem with "Arise, Elohim.  Judge the earth, for you will inherit all nations."  Here we witness an inflection point in the demise of polytheism.  Even though the worship of many gods has been considered not only appropriate but even holy, it must give way to a unified God who cares for all, especially the lowly.

In our Old Testament reading, what needs to go is the holy nation:  Israel and Judah.  Why is this?  Because they did not produce good fruit.  In Isaiah's parable, the nation is represented by a vineyard that Yahweh planted and cared for.  Instead of grapes, it yielded wild grapes.  "What's wrong with wild grapes?" we might reasonably ask.  In my opinion this is a problem of translation.  The usual Hebrew word for "grapes" (`anabhim) is used here for the expected crop, but the word translated as "wild grapes" is "be'ushim" -- which literally means "stinkers."  We get "wild grapes" from the Vulgate's translation.  So, to be clear, it's not the wildness or lack thereof that makes these grapes problematic -- it's that they stink.  What does that represent metaphorically?  Verse 7 tells us: "he looked for justice, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry of distress.  In these parallel stiches, the name in Hebrew for each disappointing product sounds very much like the name of the expected one.  Justice is "mishpat" but oppression is "mishpach".  Righteousness is "tzedhaqah" but instead it's "tza`aqah" ("a cry").  The execution closely resembles the intention, but is just different enough to be its opposition.  The holy nation therefore must be destroyed, so that the Lord can bring them to a new righteousness.  It won't do to try to work within the system this time, because like the council of the gods in Psalm 82, the dynamics are too entrenched to be changed without massive upheaval.

Luke's gospel contains many of the most endearing passages in the New Testament, but occasionally he can pour on the tough love.  In today's lesson, Jesus says "Do you think that I have come to bring peace on earth?  No, I tell you, but rather division!"  Wait, isn't Jesus' message supposed to be about union?  Love, acceptance forgiveness?  What's this division about?  Well, we could say to ourselves, we can see how there might be room in the Christian message for division between teh godly "us" and the ungodly "them" -- whether that be at the level of nations, religions, or denominations.  But Jesus takes this division and climbs right into bed with the family.  Families will be divided, he says.  Christianity, the faith of family values, has its founder saying that he's going to tear families apart.

Early readers of this passage would have undoubtedly understood this as a reference to the persecution of Christians by the Romans, which often did result in family divisions.  Many accounts exist of parents betrayng children to Roman persecution, often resulting in their martyrdom.  In some parts of the world, these kinds of divisions still occur under similar persecutions -- but does that mean that this lesson is inapplicable to us, who live in a nation that easily tolerates and sometimes even claims to embrace the Christian message?

Becoming a Christian prior to the reign of Constantine was more than just picking the religion that suited your tastes.  There were plenty of acceptable religions in the empire to choose from, but Christianity was not one of them -- because it was perceived as a threat to the established order.  Precisely because it often carried a death penalty, the decision to don the white robe and enter the water of baptism (itself a symbol of death) implied a commitment to a transformation that rendered all other priorities obsolete.  The old ways are no longer enough, they must be crucified with Christ so that new life can emerge.  Other family members often didn't understand why such a transformation was necessary, and they were sometimes threatened enough by it to take deadly action.

Over the years and across generations, we build family dynamics that define how we will interact with one another.  These structures provide a framework for family union, but sometimes we may find that they have been ill-constructed in some way.  Nobody knows this better than the family of an alcoholic, in which the dance of denial and enablement can become all-consuming.  Someone has to be willing to break the many unwritten rules of behavior within such a family in order to begin to make an opening for transformation.  

The unhealthiness of family dynamics may be obvious to anyone outside the family, but the family members themselves often become numbed to their own coping mechanisms to the point where they believe that there is nothing wrong.  When one member agitates for change, they question often arises, “Why?  What’s wrong with the beautiful family you already have?”

Change can be scary, especially when it takes place in someone that we love -- but it is inevitable in order for growth to occur.  Will they still love us?  Will we grow apart?  Will they need to leave us?  If we see these possibilities as threats, then we may decide to resist that change.  But in the process, we might be trying to suppress the person that they need to become.  We will tell ourselves that we are only concerned for their own good -- it's easy to convince ourselves that our image of who they are or should be is indeed the best possible state for them.  But instead, we need to allow them to discern their own call and follow wherever it may lead.  This can be very difficult, but it is the only genuine way forward.  We must allow the insufficient structures of union to be dissolved if we have any hope of coming to an authentic union.  May God grant us discernment so to do.

