3 Epiphany

Readings: Isaiah 9:1-4, Psalm 27:1,5-13, I Corinthians 1:10-18, Matthew 4:12-23

Our reading today from Isaiah talks about a deep darkness.  The King James version translates the word used here in the Hebrew (tzalmaveth) very literally as "the shadow of death" -- as the KJV always does, memorably in Psalm 23.  But the "deep darkness" of the NRSV might be a better translation -- or even "deepest darkness".  To our modern minds, "the shadow of death" could be taken to mean that death is approaching, or that we are in a place where we might meet death, or as a poetic expression for death itself.  To the Hebrew mind, your shadow is your darkest part, or a dark manifestation of your presence.  Death, in the Old Testament, means going to a place of absolute darkness.  Death's shadow, therefore, is even darker.  This is a way of saying "darker than your darkest imaginings."

This darkest of times, in Isaiah's context, would refer to the conquest of Zebulun and Napthtali, part of the Northern Kingdom of Israel, by Tiglath-Pileser of Assyria, who then incorporated that region into the Assyrian empire.  Samaria, further south, would not fall to the Assyrians for another decade, so the fact that the capital of the Northern Kingdom is not mentioned here provides evidence for dating this oracle to the time between those two campaigns, which also aligns within the dates for Isaiah's prophetic activity.

The darkness in the original context is thus occupation by a foreign power, and the "great light" that will displace it would seem to be a future king, from the line of David, who would reunite the kingdoms and free the people from the Assyrians.  However, the rest of the Northern Kingdom soon fell to the Assyrians, who were later unseated by the Babylonians, who went on to conquer Judah as well and take much of the population captive.  The Persians later conquered the Babylonians and allowed Jews to return and rebuild the temple and the walls of Jerusalem -- so many, including the author of some of the later parts of the book of Isaiah, took Cyrus the Persian king to be the predicted Messiah, the anointed one who would deliver Israel.

But things were not all rosy under the Persians.  The Books of Ezra and Nehemiah reveal that even though the Persian government treated them very benevolently, the people still had a deep sense of enslavement to a foreign power.  Surely the "great light" of the Messianic king was yet to shine.

Alexander the Great conquered the Persians, and the Jews did their best to play nice with him and his successors.  A little too nice for the taste of a priest named Mattathias and his sons, who staged the Maccabean revolt and eventually managed to achieve some level of independence.  An alliance with Rome, however, gave the Romans the opportunity to step in to resolve internal disputes and, by degrees, to incorporate all of Palestine into the Roman empire.

Through all of these 700-odd years, the people continued to look to the promise of this passage from Isaiah and other prophecies that predicted the coming of an anointed one who would set things right again.  And our gospel lesson in Matthew connects this very prediction with Jesus.  In the first chapter of this gospel, the author draws a lineage from David to Jesus, thus qualifying him for the Messianic title.  In chapter two, the magi come looking for the promised king, and they find Jesus and offer him gifts.  Herod the Great is not excited about the arrival of his Messianic replacement, so he orders the slaughter of the innocents in an attempt to kill Jesus.  In chapter three, John the Baptist announces the imminent arrival of the Messiah.  The baptism of Jesus and his temptation in the wilderness serve as initiations into that role.  And now here, in chapter 4, Matthew tells us that Jesus fulfills the prediction of Isaiah by entering Capernaum.

So, it would seem reasonable that everyone would expect Jesus to "restore the kingdom to Israel".  But according to the New Testament, the "great light" promised in Isaiah meant something quite different to Jesus than any kind of political realignment.

In verse 17 of our gospel, the first thing that Jesus does is to preach, "Repent! For the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand."  In modern English, the word "repent" has become encumbered with the shouts of street preachers and the judgmental condemnation of the holier-than-thou.  But in the Greek of the New Testament, the word is "metanoeo" -- literally, "think differently."  Perhaps in addition to the call to change your ways, there is also a challenge to see God's plan differently than how you had assumed it to be.

In fact, much of Jesus' subsequent teaching involves turning the expected order of things upside down.  "The last shall be first and the first, last." Blessed are the poor, the humble, the peacemakers, the persecuted.  Turn the other cheek, and take up your cross.  Finally, Jesus himself is crucifed by the very people who were ready to hail him as the Messianic king five days earlier.

We Christians believe that Jesus rose from the dead and ascended in glory, but even then he still didn't establish an earthly kingdom -- despite the continued expectations of the disciples, according to Acts 1.  Instead, he established a kingdom of transformation, self-sacrifice, humility, and love for God and for each other.

What can we take away from all this?  How does this apply to us today?  We certainly face dark times in our lives, times when it seems like it couldn't get much worse.  We cry out to God for help, and we hold onto hope in the Biblical assurances that God will help us.  And God does -- God enters us as the Anointed Word and transforms us into the image of Christ.  That is, after all, the point of all of our lives and of everything we experience.  Sometimes God effects that transformation by giving us exactly the answer we were looking for, but many times God calls us instead to "change our thinking" about what is important in order to see that the answer we received is even better than what we requested.  When we pray "Thy will be done," may we mean by that the radical transformation of all involved into the image of Christ.  In other words, "Thy kingdom come" -- for that indeed, will be a "great light" that the darkness cannot overcome.
