Proper 18

Readings: Exodus 12:1-14, Psalm 149, Romans 13:8-14, Matthew 18:15-20

The gospel lesson for today provides instructions for reconciling a wayward member of the congregation.  Rather than making a public accusation or even taking it to a higher authority, we are instructed first to address the offender privately, one on one.  This isn't just about allowing the offender to save face.  People are much more likely to respond positively to a personal exchange between equals than they are to any kind of authority or power play.  Thus, in the one-on-one encounter, we should watch ourselves and not assume an air of superiority, schooling them about their behavior.  We should present the issue as a joint problem, and request their help in devising a solution -- rather than presenting our pre-packaged answer complete with an ultimatum.  If we gain cooperation, then we will have also gained back our sister or brother.  The Greek word here, ekerdesas, has specific reference to monetary gain, which is reminiscent of the Hebrew word for redemption (ga'al), which means to "buy back."  Perhaps we may have also learned something about ourselves in the process of working through the problem together.

If the offender refuses to listen, then we are instructed to take one or two others with us. The reason for this given in the lesson is the dictum from Deuteronomy 19:15 that two or more witnesses are required to confirm any matter.  That reasoning seems to be looking forward to the next phase of escalation.  I think there might also be a more immediate benefit: if the first encounter met with hostility, there could be more than the issue at hand between the two of you.  The one or two you bring along for the second encounter should include someone who has a better relationship with the person addressed, so that a more sympathetic discussion could yield a solution.

If that doesn't work, then we are instructed to put the matter before the whole church.  This is a grave step, and one we should try to avoid.  For when we arrive here, the other person has to choose between the fellowship of the church and the path that they've been following.  The church should be welcoming enough to embrace many paths, so taking this step signals that the offender is broken in an intolerable way.  For them to admit this and repent would require a depth of humility that few people possess.  We can expect that they won't -- that they will leave the congregation instead -- and that would be a loss to everyone.

Let's back up for a moment.  How do we know when our situation fits these instructions?

Verse 15 says, "if your brother sins against you."  How does someone do that?  What constitutes "sinning against" someone?  In the Bible, sins against others can be described as removing or harming something that the other values, whether it be their possessions, their family, their body, their reputation, or anything else that they consider "theirs."  In order to feel sinned against, you must be invested in whatever it is that the other person is meddling with -- you must have an attachment to it.

This reveals a danger in the situation:  our attachments can blind us to our motives.  We may think that we are acting in the interest of justice and righteousness, when in fact we're really only seeking to further our own agenda.  Before that first encounter, we need to seek deeply within ourselves for whether the other person is actually in the wrong -- it could be that we are instead.

In our lesson from Romans, Paul discusses how love is the fulfillment of the law, for "love does no wrong to a neighbor."  That is severely understated.  Love does more than just prevent offenses.  Love changes one's perspective on every situation.  The law addresses the question "who has negatively impacted the things that we value, and what should we do about it?"  Love asks a different question: "what can we do to help our neighbors?".  The two have overlapping concerns, but the emphasis makes all the difference.  The law is attachment-focused, love is other-focused.  The question we should be asking is not "how do we stop this person from doing wrong?" but rather "how do we help them become the loving person that they were meant to be?"  In asking that question, we also need to keep in mind how far we each are from that goal.

So, in contemplating that first step mentioned in today's gospel, we must avoid approaching it with the attitude of "they're in the wrong, and I need to do what I can to correct them."  Rather, it should be something like "we're not in a good place with each other; help me God to reach their heart and for them to reach mine."  When that prayer is answered, we will have indeed regained our sister or brother.
