All Saint's Eve

Readings: Revelation 7:9-17, Psalm 34:1-10,22, I John 3:1-3, Matthew 5:1-12

All Hallow's Eve

This morning at the breakfast table, I mentioned that I would be giving the sermon today.  My son John asked me about my topic.  Mom chimed in, "he hasn't started yet," which was true -- but I added, "well, it's All Saint's Day."  John said, "Wow, what a coincidence that All Saint's Day and All Demon's Day are together -- how crazy is that?"  As I explained to him, they always are and it's no coincidence.  Pope Gregory IV, in the year 835, intentionally moved All Saint's Day from May 1 to November 1 in order to align it with the Celtic festival of Samhain, as well as other German festivals that also commemorated the dead.  At this period in Church history, missionary efforts focused on presenting Christ as the fulfilment and redemption of previous beliefs and practices, rather than as a wholesale replacement.  As a result, many pagans welcomed Christianity as a new revelation within their existing traditions, and many Druids became priests and bishops.

The ancient Celtic festival of Samhain (spelled like "Sam-hain" but pronounced "Sawin" because "mh" in Gaelic makes a "w" sound) marked the end of autumn and the beginning of winter.  It was a time of gathering the people and their herds into a more compact and sheltered life, and so it was a great time of coming together.  They also believed that the barrier between this world and the Otherworld became thinnest, so the spirits of the ancestors might come for a visit.  These spirits were not demonic in the Christian sense, but they might not all be at perfect rest, either.  Some might decide to play the part of the trickster.  Others might be downright malicious.  Those who had lived and loved well, though, could offer help and encouragement.  It was a time of holy awe, containing both wonder and fear.

Besides the ancestors, the Aos Sidhe (the Fairy folk) could also travel between the worlds easily at this time.  Unlike the Victorian idea of fairies, these beings were thought to be human-sized, very mysterious, and somewhat fearsome.  They were reckoned as the spirits of the peoples who had been displaced by the Celts, so their attitude toward the living was ambivalent at best.  You did not want to get on their bad side.  They could be helpful on their own terms, but were best left alone.  

The Christian conversion of the feast of Samhain purified the holiday by fastening attention on those ancestors who had followed Christ and who are now presumably at rest, having benevolent intentions for those of us who remain -- the "great cloud of witnesses" mentioned in the epistle to the Hebrews.  If these saints visit us in any way, it will be to encourage us in our struggles.  Furthermore, Christianity posits an absolute deity over all, who will ensure that the faithful will emerge victorious from all of their trials, as depicted in our reading today from Revelation.  "God will wipe away every tear from their eyes."  One of the key themes of the book of Revelation is that even though things might look very bad, God will triumph and God will save us, along with all of the faithful.

Our gospel lesson is Matthew's version of the Beatitudes, any one of which could occupy an entire sermon.  Today I want to focus on verse 8: "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God."  This verse has been a favorite among Christian mystics, who have often held "seeing God" (theoria) as the ultimate aim of our existence.  Its prerequisite, purity of heart, is the business of spiritual practice, but it will not be fully realized in this life.  Our epistle lesson puts this succinctly: "Beloved, we are God's children now; what we will be has not yet been revealed.  What we do know is this: when he is revealed, we will be like him, for we will see him as he is.  And all who have this hope in him purify themselves, just as he is pure."

One perennially popular Christian notion that is an unfortunate consequence of Augustine's teaching on grace is that once you accept Jesus as your Lord and Savior, the deal is done.  All that's left is to wait for Jesus to take me to heaven.  I might have a few decades to kill in the meantime -- the only thing I'm really supposed to be doing is to get as many other people as I can to buy into the same Divine Pyramid Scheme.

From our readings today and many others, we should know that the decisive moment of turning towards Christ (if we are even conscious of such a moment) is only the beginning.  The rest of our life (and perhaps even beyond it) is the process of our purification -- what John Wesley called "sanctification."  Repentance -- metanoia -- is God getting our attention and turning us around.  Purification is the upward journey from that point on.  Everything we experience is for the purpose of drawing us closer to the likeness of God.  This world isn't just a waiting room for heaven.  It's a school for becoming Christlike.  Good times and bad, poverty and wealth, sickness and health, peace and war, death and new life, our successes and especially our failings are our textbooks and exercises.  The purity to which we are called should not be confused with any kind of purity code -- as soon as it becomes legalistic, it ceases to be Christlike.  There are no easy answers and no hard and fast rules, which is why it takes a lifetime or more to fully enter into it.

Our mission to others, then, is more than getting them to sign on the line to get out of hell.  It is first and foremost about loving them, as Christ loves them.  Part of that is to help them as far as we can to see this truth of why we are here and to embrace the call of God to purification and union.  The saints who have gone before, whether or not they were canonized by the Church, can help us by their instruction and example -- and perhaps also by their occasional visitation.  Amen.
