Proper 25

Readings: Leviticus 19:1-2,15-18; Matthew 22:34-36

Hello, all of you wonderful people of Saint Mark's!  It has been more than a year now since I saw any of you in person, and I miss you all so much.  So when Matt asked me to provide this sermon, the opportunity to speak to you all, if only virtually, filled me with joy.  When he told me that the topic should be stewardship, I was slightly less elated.  I don't suppose there are many of you out there getting excited about hearing a sermon on stewardship, unless you're on the Stewardship committee or are otherwise keenly interested in the church's financial position.

Why is this topic so uncomfortable for many of us?  Perhaps it's because of our toxic relationship to money generally.  In our society, money rules.  Nothing runs without it, and those who have it control politics, public opinion, and the provision of the basic necessities of life: health care, food, and shelter.  We're conditioned to fear running short of money, being scammed out of it, or just failing to manage it wisely.  When the church turns its message towards stewardship, it can sometimes feel like the veil has been lifted and we see that after all it is all about the money.  It's easy for our ears to translate an appeal for financial help into a statement about our worth to the community:  "your prayers are fine, but what we really want is your cash."  We might begin to suspect that those who contribute more have a bigger say in things -- and in some parishes, that is the sad truth.  As with our fear of being scammed or becoming poor, these suspicions reflect how we measure our worth as individuals.  We have bought into our culture's belief that money and how we handle it defines how worthy we are.  Our very language betrays it when money or its equivalents are the only components of "net worth."  And yet, we are never satisfied with relationships that we have to buy.  How many marriages have suffered from "my spouse only loves me for what I can earn," or "my spouse doesn't respect me because I don't earn enough", even if those thoughts aren't entirely true.  Too often we cynically tolerate this transactional model and just hang on, waiting for public radio to get back to the music, waiting for the stewardship sermon to be over so we can get on with worshipping the God of Love -- even if is temporarily soured by the reminder of Mammon's privileged position.

So, let's start by confronting these toxic notions.  How much you give or don't give doesn't have anything to do with your self-worth or your worth to the Saint Mark's community.  Even though Saint Mark's needs contributions to keep the doors open, I hope and sincerely believe that you will be welcomed, appreciated, and heard even if you don't give anything.  Giving to the church is not part of a transaction.  So then, what is it?

Well, here are some other things it could be:

It could be about transferring the transactional model onto God.  If I give to the church, then God will be pleased with me and will look out for me.  That's even worse than the first model, and is even more false -- God's love and care are unconditional.  God doesn't need for you to give.  You need for you to give.  More on that later.

It could be that smug feeling of self-righteousness about the sacrifices you are making for the church.  This is a sly one, and probably infects all of us from time to time.  But instead of actually making us more holy, it only drags us down into the pits of vainglory.  We need a good dose of humility to counter this one.

It could be a genuine concern for the needs of the church, and the furtherance of its ministries.  This is a good reason, but it isn't the best. Unless...

In our gospel lesson for today, a Pharisee who was an intense student of the law asks Jesus, "which commandment in the law is the greatest?"  In response, Jesus quotes from the Torah Deuteronomy 6:5: "you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind."  Then he adds a second-place quotation from our Old Testament lesson today in Leviticus 19: "you shall love your neighbor as yourself."

Neither of these commandments is very easy to keep.  If we truly love our neighbors as ourselves, then we would want to share with each other anything that could be of mutual benefit.  I'm not saying that we need to give away everything and try to live without money.  Some are called to that, but in today's world that might not even be the most loving thing to do.  Because of our culture's obsession with material wealth, we might do more damage to the recipients if we give without discernment.  The giving that is truly loving involves more than writing a check and going our way -- it requires entering into the situation of the other in order to learn what help will be truly helpful, and then providing that as we are able.

That means, of course, that there are no easy answers here.  The help that you are called to give may be very different from the help that I am called to give.  You must discern this for yourself, but one thing should be clear from the gospels and the letters of James and John:  love of neighbor must be more than just kind words, it must involve providing help where it's needed.  Love must be the primary motive, though.  Solving problems is not an end in itself -- it is a way of expressing the love of Christ.  Giving to the church can therefore be a way of expressing love for our community.  In your discernment, I ask you to consider whether giving to Saint Mark's is part of how you're called to love your neighbor.

No church or any other institution run by humans is perfect.  But anyone who has seen the financial statements of Saint Mark's can attest to how well funds are managed and how generous a portion of the budget goes to helping people, both inside and outside the community.  Even more than that, the fellowship and spritual bonds of love between this congregation's members makes Saint Mark's an important channel for love of neighbor in my life.  With all the suffering of this year, one bright spot for me has been re-engaging with Saint Mark's through these online services that didn't exist before our present plague.  In our materialistic world, these ministries would not exist in the same form without financial support.  Therefore, for me, donating to Saint Mark's is a way of expressing my love for all of you and for all those that Saint Mark's helps.

What about that first commandment?  Ah, here is where we can get really uncomfortable.  If we are to love God with all that we are and all that we have, then we must learn to lose our attachment to anything else.  Money represents many of those other things: ease, pleasure, freedom from fear, self worth, even the ability to do good.  It is the ultimate idol, because on its own it doesn't keep any of those promises -- and even when it does, that only serves to distract us from relationship with the Divine.  That relationship must be built on absolute trust.  One of the ways that God can build that trust in our hearts is to lead us to give, especially if we give beyond what we think is practical.  This is the true meaning of sacrifice.  It is not transactional, not a quid pro quo.  It is an exercise in trust, founded in love.  It is one of the means by which God draws us out of ourselves, out of our small, egoic self with our petty concerns and into the larger self, where we are One with God.

So, I encourage you, as you consider pledging to Saint Mark's, to engage in prayerful discernment and ask God if this is part of your path to letting go of fears and attachments, and to expressing your love for your neighbor through meaningful, helpful action.

God bless you all.
