The First Sunday after Christmas Day

Readings: Isaiah 61:10-62:3, Psalm 147, Galatians 3:23-25;4:4-7, John 1:1-18

Our gospel lesson for today from the Prologue of John provides enough material for myriads of sermons.  Meister Eckhart's Commentary on the Gospel of John devotes 131 sections to these verses, and John Scotus Eriugena wrote an entire book on this passage alone.  So, I am going to narrow my subject today to just one verse from this passage, verse 5: "The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness did not overcome it."  Furthermore, I am going to focus on just one word from this verse, translated in our version as "overcome".  I promise that this seemingly minute inspection will yield far more than a merely academic study.

The Greek word that John uses here is "katalambano" -- literally, "take down", but in Greek usage it can have the sense of overcoming, gaining possession, or comprehending.  Thus, "apprehend", "master", or "grasp" might be a more inclusive translation into English.  The word is used in all of these senses elsewhere in the New Testament and in the Septuagint (the Greek version of the Old Testament), so all of those senses are reasonable translations for its use in this verse.  
The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness did not overcome it.
The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness did not grasp it.
The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness did not gain possession of it.
The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness did not comprehend it.
The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness did not master it.

John does not dwell here on what his usage of the word means, but it seems to me from the rest of John's gospel that all of these meanings apply.

If we closely examine the quest for knowledge in human society, we will find that comprehension is a form of conquest, via containment and control.  Once we understand how something works, then we may be able to prevent it from harming us, or to harness it for our own purposes, or to conclude that it can be safely ignored, or to lead us on to other discoveries that will have one of these outcomes.  Having mastered our subject, we become its master.  We have an aversion to mystery.  We still reach for the fruit of the tree of all knowledge, hoping to become like gods, able to decide for ourselves what we wish to embrace or refuse.

When I worked at Salesforce and wore my monastic habit to the office, a colleague of mine from Bosnia began to ask me questions about my vocation.  "Can you put a curse on someone?" he asked.  "No, there is no cursing," I replied.  In his thick Bosnian accent he retorted, "well what good is it, if you can't even put a curse on someone?"

What good is it, indeed?  What good is Christianity, if it doesn't help us to achieve some personal goal? 

About this, Meister Eckhart says:

Remember, if you seek anything of your own, you will never find God, for you are not seeking God alone. You are looking for something with God, treating God like a candle with which to look for something; and when you have found what you were looking for, you throw the candle away. That is what you are doing: whatever you look for with God is nothing, whatever it might be, whether profit or reward or inwardness or anything at all: you are looking for nothing, and so you will find nothing  -- Sermon 40 (Pfeiffer; Quint 4)

Unfortunately, we often turn to God when we need something.  We pray for something to turn out the way we want it to, instead of praying that we will yield our hard clay to the Divine Potter's hands and be molded by our experiences into what God desires.  Even trying to conform ourselves to the image of Christ by acts of charity, Bible study, or inward practice can become our own little project, with our own notions about what the desired results look like.  If we are seeking an image of ourselves instead of seeking God, then we are just as utilitarian in our use of the knowledge of God as Monsanto is with their knowledge of genetics.

In fact, the knowledge of God cannot be mastered.  This is part of the apparent absurdity of the Christian message.  But there is more.

Friedrich Nietzsche wrote in "Beyond Good and Evil":

In the Jewish “Old Testament,” the book of divine justice, there are men, things, and speeches of such impressive style that the world of Greek and Indian literature has nothing to place beside them. If we stand with fear and reverence before these tremendous remnants of what human beings once were, we will in the process suffer melancholy thoughts about old Asia and its protruding peninsula of Europe, which, in contrast to Asia, wants to represent the “progress of man.”

Naturally, whoever is, in himself, only a weak, tame domestic animal and who knows only the needs of domestic animals (like our educated people nowadays, including the Christians of “educated” Christianity), among these ruins such a man finds nothing astonishing or even anything to be sad about—-a taste for the Old Testament is a touchstone with respect to “great” and “small”—- perhaps he finds the New Testament, that book of grace, still preferable to his heart (in it there is a good deal of the really tender stifling smell of over-pious and small-souled people).

To have glued together this New Testament, a sort of rococo of taste in all respects, with the Old Testament into one book, the book, the Bible – that is perhaps the greatest act of audacity and “sin against the spirit” which literary Europe has on its conscience.

(endquote)

In Nietzsche's view, the Hebrew concept of God is a grand projection of the ideal human: transcendent and powerful, with mercy for only his loyal followers, and with swift and terrible punishment for those who resist him.  There is no room in this God for boundless grace, or for any intimate relationship with the All Powerful One.  Certainly, God could not be bothered to attend to the small and insignificant.

Nietzsche fails to consider  many, many passages in the Old Testament in which God does indeed care for the lowly.  One of my favorite Psalms, number 113, contains these verses:

Who is like the LORD our God, who sits enthroned on high,
    but stoops to behold the heavens and the earth?
He takes up the weak out of the dust
    and lifts up the poor from the ashes.

Jesus's statement that not one sparrow falls to the ground without the Father is not a rejection, but rather a refinement of Hebrew concepts of God.

When we are tempted to think that anything is too insignificant for God's attention, we are making God smaller rather than greater.  The President of the United States doesn't have time to talk to me, not because he is greater than his office, but rather because he is too small for it.  He has great responsibilities coupled with a scarcity of resources.  That is why presidents age so quickly in office.  It is not so with God.  God's resources are infinite -- which means that God has infinite attention to pay to even the tiniest details of everything.  God cares about all the small stuff, although God's purposes for them may differ from ours.

Thus, God's transcendence (that God is beyond and above all things) is not at odds with God's immanence (that God is intimately involved in all things).  Rather, God's immanence is a product of God's transcendence.  If God were not in all things, God would be smaller.

The most extreme example of this is the Incarnation.  Not that God was not already immanent in all things, but we needed for God to become one of us, so that we could see, hear, and touch that.  We needed him to die, so that we could know that God is with us in our darkest moments.  We needed him to rise again, so that we might know that God is able to raise us to new life.  That transformation is, in fact, God's purpose for all of life's little details.

On January 1, we will all celebrate the passing of 2020, which most of us will always remember as being a very difficult year.  We may not understand what God's purposes were in bringing us through this year.  Perhaps we need to surrender our ability to grasp that.

On January 1, we will also celebrate the Feast of the Holy Name.  The Holy Name of God in the Old Testament was considered so holy that we no longer know with any certainty how it was pronounced.  Exodus links its meaning to the verb "hayah" ("to be"), but the nature of this being of God is clearly transcendent.  The Holy Name that we celebrate is Jesus, which includes the holy name of God but adds that "he saves".  In the incarnation, the transcendent God puts on mortal flesh in order to transform us into the same likeness.  Thus, God's humility is part of God's greatness.  Absurd, but true.

May we, who cannot fully comprehend the light of Christ, be overcome by it.  Amen.
