Lent 1  David of Wales

Readings: Genesis 2:15-17, 3:1-7; Psalm 32; Romans 5:12-19; Matthew 4:1-11

"...just as one man's trespass led to condemnation for all, so one man's act of righteousness leads to justification and life for all."

Salvation: what is it, anyway?  Is it a Get Out Of Hell Free card, purchased by substitutionary sacrifice?  Does the mere act of believing this absolve us of all responsibility?  From what does Jesus save us, and to what purpose?

Our Old Testament lesson today relates the familiar story of the temptation in the Garden of Eden.  On its surface, it seems to paint an absurd picture of God.  What was he thinking?  Every parent knows that if you tell a child that there is only one thing they cannot have, then that will be the one thing that they simply must have.  Like many unwise parents, God seems to attach a vain threat of punishment to his command.  God's motives also appear questionable, as the event proves that the serpent's analysis of the situation was right -- their eyes are opened, and they gain knowledge, apparently threatening God's authority.

Although this story paints a less than perfect picture of God, it brings humanity sharply into focus.  What draws Eve's hand inexorably towards the fruit is the desire for knowledge, and with that knowledge to obtain power.  The ability, through knowledge, to distinguish for ourselves between what is desirable and undesirable promises the power to determine our own way, without the necessity of relying upon God.  Unlike other creatures, we can begin to shape the world according to our own plan, for our own purposes.  We do become like gods, determining our own destinies, as well as exerting control over other creatures.

But this power does not come without a price.  In the story, it leads directly to our expulsion from Eden.  We are doomed to work in order to support ourselves, and eventually to die and return to the earth.  In Hebrew, the word "Eden" means "delight" -- so our decision to strike out on our own path of technology took us away from the delights of the simple life and towards living by the sweat of our brow.  This pattern repeats throughout history.  The invention of iron smelting made it possible to create better tools, but also more deadly weapons that raised the levels of bloodshed and oppression throughout the world.  The Industrial Revolution of the eighteenth century onwards enabled or enhanced the manufacture of many goods, but also enslaved generations of workers, inflamed within us the desire for those goods, eliminated many ancient ways of life, destroyed ecosystems and polluted our planet.  The technological revolution of the last several decades has made many wonders and marvels possible from medical breakthroughs to instant communication around the planet, yet it has also eliminated many jobs and concentrated more and more wealth in the hands of a few.  Instead of making our lives easier, these technological advancements seem to have only opened our eyes to even more ways to make ourselves busy, distracted, and without silence in our lives.  Our newfound ability to connect over the web has replaced the need to connect in person.  Hiding behind our online images, we can avoid the pain of being intimately known with all of our flaws.  There is even a new so-called social network named Botnet where you can post your updates and receive comments and likes from all of your friends -- except that your friends aren't human.  They're Artificial Intelligence bots that are trained on how to respond to social network posts -- providing the illusion of connectedness in complete isolation from other humans.

The Genesis story holds out no hope of a return to Eden.  The cherubim and a flaming sword bar the way.  We can't put the Genie back in the bottle.  Having the power that knowledge brings, we don't seem to be able to avoid the cycle of oppressing each other and even ourselves.  This, in my view, is the best explanation of original sin.  We inherit and propagate this oppressive behavior from one generation to the next, by means of the desire for control.

In our gospel lesson, Jesus is tempted in the wilderness.  The first temptation seems reasonable enough -- you're hungry, you can make yourself some bread from these rocks (after all, God just told you that you were his son after your baptism), so go ahead!  But Jesus sees through this temptation, which is eerily similar to the temptation in the Garden of Eden, though it also differs somewhat.  Rather than eating in order to become divine, the invitation is to be divine in order to eat.  In other words, transform your divinity into another lever for power and control in the pursuit of personal ends.  Just as in the garden, the temptation is to focus on your will instead of God's.  Jesus answers this with "one does not live by bread alone, but by every word that comes from the mouth of God."  This quotation from Deuteronomy 8:3 in its original context speaks about when the Israelites were hungry in the wilderness and how God provided, not the food they wanted, but the food that sustained them.  So Jesus resists the temptation to use his divine power in order to guide even the smallest things according to his own will, but rather only as directed by God.

The second temptation, which is the third in Luke's account, is to publicly display his divine sonship by leaping from a height of the temple and expecting God to save him.  This temptation is two-pronged.  First, it attempts to control God by means of God's own promises.  Second, if successful, this display of divinity would exert an amazing power of persuasion over all who witnessed it.  Jesus' reply identifies the first part ("you shall not test the Lord your God"), but throughout his ministry he also refused the second part: to show proofs of his divinity in order to convince.  When he performed miracles, he often told the recipients not to tell anyone.  He did not want to use his divine sonship as a lever of control.

In the third temptation, the devil offers a simple exchange.  Worship me, and I will give you all the kingdoms of the world.  In fact, both actions are one and the same.  To have power over all is to worship the devil -- the devil being that which seeks to set itself up in the place of God in order to have control over everything.  Jesus responds with "worship the Lord your God, and serve only him."  In other words, surrender all power and all control to God.

The Messiah expected by many Jews at the time of Jesus was to be a king, perhaps divine but certainly upheld by God, who would benevolently exercise God's authority.  He would be, above all, powerful.  Jesus, however, chose a path of humility, caring for others, suffering and death.  That is also the path to which Jesus calls us.  "Take up your cross, and follow me," he says.  We too must live a life of humility, caring for others, suffering and death to self.  We must be crucified with Christ, as Paul says in Galatians.  The "abundance of grace and the free gift of righteousness" that Paul speaks of in Romans is not just a Get Out of Hell Free card.  It is not just about forgiveness, it is about transformation.  For when we put to death the old self that seeks power over our own little world, then we can be raised to new life in Christ -- a life that is free from the cycle of power and domination.  This is not easy, neither is it instant.  The smallest attachment or desire can rope us right back into our smaller, egoic selves.  But when we fall, the grace of God in Christ can lift us up again, until we are gradually transformed into his image, lose all attachment to the things of this world, and learn to walk with God in the garden again.

