Proper 7

Readings: I Samuel 17:1a,4-11,19-23,32-49; Psalm 9:9-20; II Corinthians 6:1-13, Mark 4:35-41

Our first lesson today is part of the familiar story of David and Goliath.  While this story certainly helped to legitimize David's subsequent kingship, it served a much broader purpose within Biblical history, illustrating the maxim found in verse 47: "the LORD does not save by sword and spear; for the battle is the LORD's".

In this first book of Samuel, the Philistines are depicted as a militarily superior people who had invaded the coastal region of Palestine a couple of centuries earlier.  During the period of the Judges, they had made the tribes of Israel their vassals.  The Israelites were able to retain some independence by virtue of the mountains in which they lived, but when facing the Philistines in open battle they were often defeated.  The Israelites wavered between accepting their overlords and maintaining a desperate resistance.  Shortly after the time in which today's story is set, the Israelites would finally be able to throw off Philistine domination, under the leadership of none other than King David.

Goliath personifies Philistine superiority.  He is, literally, larger than life -- and no warrior dares to face him.  He defies Israel and Israel's God.  He thereby brings into question the faith that Israel has in that God.  Goliath's type recurs often in Biblical history.  When the Assyrians conquered the Northern Kingdom along with many of the cities of Judah and threatened to take Jerusalem, they also presented a seemingly irresistable force and their spokesperson explicitly called into question the ability of Israel's God to deliver them.  Later still, when the Maccabees rebelled against their Seleucid overlords to repel the threat of having their national and religious identity overwhelmed by Greek culture, their initial desperation and ultimate victory would have resonated well with this story.  I hardly need to mention the Roman occupation and the various attempts at resistance to it, or the hardships endured by Jews throughout their history in Europe and elsewhere.  The modern state of Israel still draws inspiration from this story, despite their military dominance in the region (thanks mostly to the United States).  It's too bad that many Israelis can't see that they have become Goliath to the Palestinians -- but I digress.

The phrase "David and Goliath" has become cliché for any struggle in which an unlikely champion prevails over a vastly superior foe: an underrated candidate winning an election, an unranked sports team winning a championship, a startup unseating an established corporation.  But most of these secular applications miss the point of the story, because we assume and subsequently seek to understand the qualities within the underdogs that enabled them to overcome.  In the Biblical stories, that quality is God alone: "the battle is the LORD's".

In our gospel lesson, the situation for the disciples has become desperate.  A storm on the Sea of Galilee has whipped up huge waves that are overwhelming and filling their boat with water.  Meanwhile, an exhausted Jesus is sleeping on a pillow in the stern.  How often do we feel overwhelmed, like we aren't going to be able to survive -- and yet it seems like God is asleep, doing nothing about the situation.  "Do you not care that we are perishing?" proceeds simultaneously from the mouths of the disciples and from ours.  The Greek word translated as "care" here is μελω (melō), which means "to take an interest in."  "Aren't you at all interested, Jesus?  Doesn't this matter to you at all?"

Jesus wakes up, and says two words: σιωπα, πεφιμωσο.  The first, siopa, means "be silent!"  The second, pephimoso, means "be muzzled!".  Jesus is not comforting the storm, he is shushing it.  And then, a great calm follows.  

Now that Jesus has resolved the problem, the disciples are filled with fear and amazement.  They obviously didn't think that Jesus would be able to do that.  They certainly didn't believe that they would be safe while he slept.  While a physical storm had raged outside, a more violent storm overwhelmed their hearts.  Then when the sea became calm, their hearts became even more troubled.  This upset a lot of what they thought they knew about reality.  Jesus says to them, "Why are you afraid?  Have you still no faith?"  These questions are both in the present tense.  The disciples haven't yet fully grasped the point: the battle is the Lord's.

As part of his appeal to re-open their hearts to him, Paul recounts for the Corinthians a litany of the difficulties he has endured for the churches: "in afflictions, in hardships, in distresses, in beatings, in imprisonments, in riots, in labors, in watchings, in fastings". He then follows with a list of his manner of enduring these: "in pureness, in knowledge, in patience, in kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in sincere love, in the word of truth, in the power of God."  Note where he places the emphasis here (as well as in other similar accounts):  the fruit of these trials is not in their resolution -- it is in Paul's faithful response to them.  In the Greek, there is no transition between these two lists.  They are, in fact, one list.  It's all good.

If God is all-powerful, we might reasonably ask, then why are there any problems in the world?  Why must we endure suffering, even if God does bring it to an end?  What is the point?

I am convinced that all of our experiences, both what we call good and what we call bad, are tools in the hand of the Fashioner of Souls.  Everything serves to form us more perfectly into God's likeness.  So rather than asking, "Why, Lord?  Don't you care?" perhaps we should be asking "What am I to learn from this?  If I truly trust you, God, how do I respond?"  The greater struggle in life is not about our physical needs, our social status, or even the avoidance of death -- it is rather about transcending our personal fears and learning to trust God no matter what the outcome.  The truly menacing giant is the Goliath within -- but "the battle is the Lord's".  The truly perilous storm is the one in our hearts.  May God grant us a great calm.

