The Fourth Sunday of Easter

Readings: Acts 4:5-12, Psalm 23, I John 3:16-24, John 10:11-18

In our gospel lesson for today, Jesus repeats a word three times, and the epistle lesson repeats it again.  That word is translated "lay down" -- Jesus speaks of laying down his life for the sheep, and John's epistle tells us that we also should lay down our lives for one another.

The Greek word used here is τιθημι ("tithēmi"), which means "to place or set down").  The sense of this word contrasts with another Greek word `ιστημι "histēmi", which means "to set up" or "to establish", while tithēmi is about putting down.  What the two words have in common, however, is intentionality.  Neither action is forced or accidental.  Our English words "theme" and "thesis" (among many others) come from "tithēmi" -- something set down intentionally as a topic for discussion.  A cognate word in Persian meant "a law" (how many times have parents had to "lay down the law?") and another cognate in Sanskrit meant "to plant").  Latin's cognate "facere" means "to do" or "to make".  The setting down or laying down is intentional.  Jesus in John's gospel builds on this sense of the word, and makes it explicit: "No one takes it from me, but I lay it down of my own accord. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it up again."

What is it that Jesus is "laying down" and what will he "take up again?"  Here's where we find out who is already sleeping or distracted.  His life -- which in the most obvious sense refers to his willing, imminent death, followed by his resurrection.  But I believe that there is more to this than what sits on the surface.  I believe that this "laying down" includes what Paul in Philippians 2 called "kenosis" ("emptying"): "he didn't consider equality with God a thing to be grasped, but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of humans, and being found in the form of a man, he humbled himself, becoming obedient to death, death even on a cross."

The word translated as "life" in our readings is ψυχη ("psuchē"), from which the English word "psyche" derives.  In Greek, it can mean everything from "life" to "mind" and is often translated "soul."  It is that about you that makes you you -- this is what Christ laid down in order to become one of us and to die as one of us.  The temptation narratives in Matthew and Luke tell us that Jesus emptied himself in this way at the beginning of his ministry.  By resisting the first temptation, he set aside his need for physical nourishment in preference for divine priorities.  By refusing to jump off the temple, he set aside his need for validation and assurance of divine protection in preference for trust and obedience.  By refusing the kingdoms of the world, he set aside his need for personal glory in preference for the self-emptying to which his Father called him.  It is no wonder that in Paradise Regained, Milton only tells the story of the temptations, for they succinctly encapsulate Jesus' self-emptying for our redemption.

What do we do with this?  Paul prefaced the passage from Philippians I just quoted with, "have the same mind in yourselves which was also in Christ Jesus."  We are called to the same self-emptying.  In all four gospels, Jesus tells us that we must lose our life in order to find it.  He says that in order to follow him, we must take up our cross -- which means embracing a death, the death of our selfhood.  We are called to the same self-emptying that Jesus demonstrated in his life and death.

In our epistle lesson, John tells us that "we ought to lay down our lives for one another."  He then immediately applies this to providing physical or financial care for the needy.  The question might reasonably arise: if we are supposed to be unconcerned for our selfish needs, then why must we provide for the needs of others?  Shouldn't we be helping them to transcend their small selves as well?  Certainly we should!  But let's not allow that reasoning to become an excuse for non-action.  If we look at the matter more closely, we will see where we go wrong.  The physical needs of others aren't transcendentally important in themselves, but they provide an opportunity for the engagement of compassion.  Opportunities for compassion may arise without the presence of physical needs, but physical needs provide just such an opportunity that we don't want to miss.  By helping one another in mundane matters, we demonstrate love -- as long as it is done from a loving heart.  If we are helping others only in order to salve our conscience or to lift up our own self-image, then we might as well not.  If we do not have love, then we are nothing, as Paul says in I Corinthians 13.  Helping others for any other reason is just as distancing as not helping them at all -- we look past them as he extend our hand.  We must instead use the opportunity to meet them where they are, soul to soul, in the very way that Christ meets us, soul to soul, where we are.  That personal encounter in love is transcendentally important.  

What does it mean that Jesus "took up his life again" -- besides the obvious meaning of physical resurrection?  It means this: Christ initiated a new life in which we are included.  If we have been crucified with him, we will also be raised with him.  If we lay down our egoic selves for each other's sake, then we too will become part of the new resurrection life of inclusion and redemption.  May God help us so to do.  Amen.
