Proper 19

Readings: Isaiah 50:4-9a, Psalm 19, James 3:1-12, Mark 8:27-38

Two days before Mother Helen asked me to give this sermon, I was having a conversation with some of my friends in California, and we chanced upon the topic of what makes a sermon good.  We mentioned many qualities, including an insightful reading of the text, its application to our lives today, and personal experiences that illustrate those applications.  The most important quality that we all agreed on, though, was that it doesn't gloss over the hard topics.  Easy to swallow, pre-packaged answers to the hard questions do not serve any useful purpose.  If we are not challenged by the message, then we aren't getting the message we need to hear in order to grow.

Remembering especially some of the sermons delivered by Debie Thomas of Saint Mark's in Palo Alto, I'll go a little further.  A truly great sermon doesn't seek foremost to challenge its audience, but rather its author.  The thing that the author would most prefer to look away from or gloss over is the very thing that God calls them to drag out in front of everyone and wrestle with.  Such a sermon is manifestly authentic.  It does not patronize the congregation, because the speaker shares in the struggle.  It may indeed help someone who wrestles with the same question, but it also helps more generally by demonstrating how to confront any difficult topic honestly, provided it doesn't jump to a premature or facile solution. 

Mark Twain reportedly said, "It ain't those parts of the Bible that I can't understand that bother me, it is the parts that I do understand."  We often find that the Bible says things that we don't want it to say -- things that conflict with the way we think that God, and the world, ought to be.  Much of this we can explain away as the product of human authorship -- the beliefs and biases of the Biblical authors coloring the story with their own interpretation.  That's certainly a valid observation that is widely applicable, but it doesn't explain everything.  Unless we dispense with all of it, or gloss it all over (which is another way of dispensing with it), there is always something in scripture that shatters our view of God, ourselves, and the world; and calls us to something beyond our limited notions.  What makes us think that our own beliefs and biases will be any more foolproof than those of our spiritual ancestors?

In today's gospel lesson, Peter proclaims that Jesus is the Christ -- literally, the Anointed.  This title was pregnant with meaning.  The Greek χριστος ("christos") translates the Hebrew חישמ ("meshiach"), from which comes the English word "Messiah".  In the Hebrew Bible it is applied to those chosen by God, especially the kings in the line of David.  After the fall of Judah to the Babylonians, the later prophets reapplied the term to the hope of a future king who would restore Israel to its rightful state with divine help.  Isaiah 45:1 applies the title to Cyrus the Persian, who allowed the Babylonian captives to return.  Many probably thought that Judas Maccabeus filled the role.  Others applied it to the Herodian kings (how much in flattery, we can only guess).  But all of these soon passed away, and the hope grew for an eternal, and at least semi-divine, ruler.

Jesus seems to accept the title from Peter, and then (according to all three synoptic gospels) proceeds to describe his imminent suffering, death, and resurrection.  This does not go down well with Peter's conception of what a Messiah is supposed to be.  Peter struggles with the "text" of the incarnate Word, which does not conform to the image to which Peter is attached.  "Get behind me Satan," says Jesus, "For you are setting your mind not on divine things but on human things."  Then he tells them all, "If any want to become my followers, let them deny themselves and take up their cross and follow me."

In the Greek, there is a link between the two verses that is not apparent in most English translations.  The Greek literally says, "If anyone wants to follow behind me" -- using the exact same word for "behind" in both verses.  Jesus isn't being dismissive of Peter, he is telling Peter to follow behind him, and then he proceeds to describe what that means.  "Satan" in this context probably takes its literal Semitic meaning of "adversary" -- Peter is on the wrong side, and he needs to come around.  It's a highly charged word in the New Testament, though, and emphasizes the critical distinction between the two paths.

So, what does it mean to take up our cross and follow Christ?  One obvious feature from this passage and many others is the loss of attachments.  "Those who want to save their life will lose it, and those who lose their life for my sake, and for the sake of the gospel, will find it."  In Luke 14, Jesus says "If anyone comes to me and does not hate his own father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, yes, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple."  Paul, in Galatians 2:20 says, "I have been crucified with Christ. It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me."  We are called to lose all attachments to anything we have, or have achieved, or think we are, or could be.

There is a lot in common here with Eastern religions, especially Buddhist ideas of self-transcendence.  In the practice of contemplation, we Christian contemplatives share many tools and practices with those faiths.  Buddhists would also agree with Christian monastics that the greatest danger in detachment lies in making that practice itself into an attachment.

But there is more to the Way of the Cross than mere self-transcendence.  If that were not so, Jesus' words from the cross, if any, would have been "I'm fine."  Instead, we hear "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?"  The goal of Christian self-transcendence is not to avoid suffering, but rather to enter deeply into the suffering of the world, as Christ did.

And that is what I struggle with the most.  That is the part of Christ's call to which I would turn a deaf ear.  I have always felt some call to detachment, though I have found in monastic practice that attachments run so deep that it may be impossible to find the bottom.  But in all of that, I sometimes catch a glimpse of myself out of the corner of my eye -- using detachment as a way to insulate myself from difficult feelings; to be able to behold the suffering of others, and even to respond compassionately, but at some level not to care.  Precisely there is where I have dropped my cross and veered off the path that follows Christ.  That's when I need to hear "get behind me."

Exactly what entering into that suffering means in practice I have not yet explored very deeply.  May God reveal it to each of us.  Amen.
