Last Sunday After Epiphany

Readings: 2 Kings 2:1-12, Psalm 50:1-6, 2 Corinthians 4:3-6, Mark 9:2-9

Our readings today overflow with accounts of awe-inspiring experiences of the Divine.

In the story of Elijah and Elisha, Elijah parts the waters of the Jordan by striking it with his rolled-up mantle.  This of course recalls the parting of both the Red Sea and the Jordan in the stories of Moses and Joshua.  The word for mantle in Hebrew is 'adareth, which is from a root meaning "glory."  Elijah used this same mantle earlier to indicate his selection of Elisha as his successor.  In the verse following our reading, we learn that the mantle fell from Elijah as he was assumed into heaven.  Elisha takes up the mantle (hence our common phrase).  He will use it to part the waters of the Jordan again, and this will be a sign that he truly has succeeded in the role of his mentor.

But that isn't the only amazing thing in this story.  A chariot and horses of fire separate Elisha and Elijah, and then Elijah is carried up to heaven in a whirlwind.  I don't think anyone would disagree with the observation that these are not ordinary experiences.

In Mark's account of the Transfiguration, Jesus takes three of his disciples up on a mountain and is there transformed.  His clothes become dazzlingly white.  Moses and Elijah appear and converse with him although they have not lived on the earth for centuries.  A cloud overshadows them.  From the cloud a voice announces "This is my Son, the Beloved; listen to him!", recalling the voice of God from the cloud on Mount Sinai in the Moses narrative.

In our Psalm, God "shines forth" out of Zion.  "Before him there is a consuming flame, and round about him a raging storm."  Phenomena like these attend the appearance of God throughout the Bible.  We post-Enlightenment readers are tempted to take them all figuratively, but in light of the Elijah story and the accounts of the Transfiguration, should we?  Perhaps we have a need to do so, but in that we differ from most of our religious ancestors.

Why do we find it so difficult to admit the possibility of Divine phenomena that we cannot explain rationally?  On the other hand, if I have an experience that I can't explain, no matter how hard I look for causes, I might allow it as something from God.  But if you tell me about your similar experience (or even one more believable), I'm the sudden skeptic.  Why is this?  Not without good reason, we're afraid of getting fooled, being taken in by someone posing as "spiritual" who might want our approval, our attention, or our money.

Indeed, we are myth-making creatures, always looking for ways to tell the story "better," sometimes unconsciously or semi-consciously embellishing the experience for ourselves and our auditors.  We are also status-seeking social creatures who, again with varying degrees of consciousness, will readily make use of any opportunity to be exalted in our own eyes and in the eyes of our community.  The temptation is real, may God deliver us from it.

Yesterday, I ran into a wonderful phrase in the Hebrew of Jeremiah 23: mah-latebhen 'eth-habar ("what is the straw to the wheat?").  In this chapter, God speaking through Jeremiah is taking the other prophets to task for prophesying lies.  They claim that they have had dreams or visions in which Yahweh says, "You shall have peace...No evil shall come upon you," even though they are addressing people who are not following Yahweh's ways.  

Jeremiah's message is that this can't be from God.  But God does have real messages for us.  Even though a lot of what comes out of the mouths of so-called prophets and preachers is only straw, there is a true wheat.  How do we tell them apart?

"Isn't my word like fire?" Jeremiah goes on to say in verse 29, "and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces?"  God's word is uncomfortable, and transformative.

Elisha was allowed to witness Elijah's assumption, not for his appreciation of its dramatic effect, but in order to empower him to follow in his mentor's footsteps -- a path that was not without persecution.

The disciples were allowed to see Jesus transfigured and conversing with the ancients, not because it was cool -- this was Peter's apparent misunderstanding in wanting to preserve the moment -- but in order to give them strength to get through what lay immediately ahead:  so that after Jesus was tortured to death and buried, they might be just barely able to allow that the experience of his resurrection was not the hysterical imagination of a few women.  The belief in the reality of that experience would carry them through persecutions and other struggles in the growth of the early church.

The word of God is like fire.  Like a hammer that breaks the rocks in pieces.  If it makes you comfortable and self-satisfied instead of turning your life upside down to transform you to face challenges, it might be false prophecy.  There's a reason why almost every Biblical encounter with the Divine contains a large dose of fear.  We fear the fire and the hammer.  We fear being consumed, broken, and transformed.  We fear losing our life in order to find it.  We fear a universe in which we are not in control -- in which we must trust in God instead of in ourselves.

May God give us ears to hear that word, and eyes to see the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, that we too may be transfigured into the Divine likeness.  Amen.
