Proper 16

Readings: Isaiah 58:9b-14, Psalm 103:1-8, Hebrews 12:18-29, Luke 13:10-17

A cursory reading of our lectionary selections for today may give the impression that they were chosen to pick a fight.  In this corner, weighing in at 929 chapters, we have the Hebrew Bible, champion of the sabbath, as voiced in our reading from Isaiah: "refrain from trampling the sabbath, from pursuing your own interests on my holy day" -- versus the challenger Jesus, who calls "hypocrite!" when the leader of the synagogue tries to enforce the sabbath's observance. So, God, which is it?

In Exodus chapter 20, the observation of the sabbath is included in the ten commandments: "Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six days you shall labor, and do all your work, but the seventh day is a Sabbath to the Lord your God. On it you shall not do any work, you, or your son, or your daughter, your male servant, or your female servant, or your livestock, or the sojourner who is within your gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is in them, and rested on the seventh day. Therefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and made it holy."  The rationale is thus a weekly recognition of God through imitating God's own cycle of work and rest.

The parallel account in Deuteronomy chapter 5 provides a somewhat different explanation: "...that your male servant and your female servant may rest as well as you. You shall remember that you were a slave in the land of Egypt, and the Lord your God brought you out from there with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm. Therefore the Lord your God commanded you to keep the Sabbath day."  Compassion for those who labor is the rationale here, because God delivers the oppressed from their oppressors.  So for one day a week at least, don't be an oppressor.

Both of these motives work together in the Biblical observance of the sabbath.  By contrast, "pursuing your own interests" as the author of our passage from Isaiah says, is a failure to stop and recognize God and can also be oppressive to anyone involved in your plans, as well as to yourself.  But the prophet goes even further, and the NRSV doesn't quite do justice to the force of the Hebrew here.  In verse 13, beginning where the NRSV has "If you refrain from trampling the sabbath", reading more literally we have "If you turn back your foot from the sabbath, from doing your pleasure on the day of my holiness; and call the sabbath a delight and the holiness of the LORD honorable; and you honor it, not doing your own ways nor finding your own pleasure, nor speaking your own words..."  This calls for a complete surrender to God of not only our actions, but also all our words and thoughts -- making the sabbath a radical imitation of God.

When Jesus heals the woman on the sabbath and the ruler of the synagogue objects because healing is a form of work, Jesus calls him and those of the same opinion "hypocrites."  This is a word straight from the Greek `υποκριται (hupokritai), meaning "actors" as in a stage play.  They are putting on a show of holiness, says Jesus, because they are willing to bend this law just a little in their own lives in order to show compassion to their own animals and not leave them without water on the sabbath -- but in the synagogue where they can be seen, they aren't willing to relax it at all in order to show compassion to a suffering human being.  They are focused on their interpretation of and compliance with the rules, filling in their imaginary scorecard with God, oblivious to any prompting of the Spirit to step outside those bounds.  Jesus is being present and surrendered to God, putting God's lovingkindness into action, and providing relief to the oppressed.  Jesus is truly keeping the spirit of the law by breaking the strict interpretation thereof.

Oh, and we skimmed over the first part of our reading from Isaiah.  Did you notice that it is all about showing compassion?  "If you remove the yoke from among you, the pointing of the finger, the speaking of evil, if you offer your food to the hungry and satisfy the needs of the afflicted, then your light shall rise in the darkness and your gloom be like the noonday."  The yoke was a symbol of servitude.  Keeping the sabbath was never meant to be a form of oppression.  "The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath," as Jesus says in Mark chapter 2.

The same goes for all kinds of religious observance.  The desert monastics of the third and fourth centuries were famous for their fasting, but there are numerous accounts of their setting this aside to show hospitality.  John Cassian wrote: "We came from Palestine to Egypt, and visited one of the hermits. After he had welcomed us, we asked him, 'When you receive guests, why don’t you fast? In Palestine they do.' He answered, 'Fasting is always possible but I cannot keep you here forever. Fasting is useful and necessary, but we can choose to fast or not fast. God’s law demands from us perfect love. I receive Christ when I receive you, so I must do all I can to show you love. When I have said goodbye to you, I can take up my rule of fasting again.  The sons of the bridegroom cannot fast while the bridegroom is with them; when he is taken from them, then they can fast' (Matt. 9:15)." 

Here is another account from the Desert Fathers: "Two brothers once came to see a hermit whose custom it was not to eat every day. When he saw them, he welcomed them cheerfully and said, ‘A fast has its own reward, but whoever eats because of love, obeys two commandments: he loses his self-will, and he refreshes his brothers.’" The desert monastics understood that the fast could easily become a source of pride and wilfulness instead of the humility it was meant to engender.  Breaking their rule in order to show kindness avoided that distracting attachment.

It’s good to have principles, rules, and routines for ourselves in order to stay disciplined, but we need to remember that there is an overriding, higher principle that we must always obey.

Our Psalm today is perhaps my favorite Psalm.  I won't go into all the reasons why, but let me draw your attention to verse 8: "The LORD is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger and of great kindness."  This is a somewhat standard formula used in many places in scripture, so we often glide right over it.  It says that God is first and foremost about compassion and mercy, not about strict enforcement of the rules.  The last word of the verse, translated here as "kindness", is the Hebrew word חסד (chesed), which means a lovingkindness that goes above and beyond what is required by the relationship.  God is always willing to lay perfection aside in order to embrace us in loving relationship.  That is a large part of what the incarnation and the cross signify.  That is what we are called to do for each other, and for ourselves as well.

Yesterday I was working on this sermon (it has been my habit ever since college term papers to wait until the last day and then work like mad to get finished on time).  I got a text from my daughter.  Today is her birthday.  She had already received the gift I had sent her and wanted to chat.  My internal taskmaster, who after all only gets to work on the day before something is due and can therefore be quite insistent, wanted me to try to end the conversation so I could get back to work.  Then my better angel stepped in and said, "Wait a minute!  This is exactly what you're writing about!  If you had to go extemporaneous tomorrow, even if you had to stand stupidly in front of everyone not knowing what to say, would that be worse than making your daughter feel like you don't want to talk to her?"  So I put the sermon out of my mind and gave her my complete attention.  We both enjoyed the conversation thoroughly.







Amen.

