Epiphany 1

Readings: Isaiah 43:1-7; Psalm 29; Acts 8:14-17; Luke 3:15-17,21-22

Happy Epiphany!  That's something you're not likely to hear outside of a liturgical church.  Most other people wouldn't even know what you're talking about.  If they've heard the word at all, it was likely with the sense of "a sudden realization" -- a meaning that has more in common with the roots of the word "apocalypse" than "epiphany".  "Apocalypse" comes from the Greek verb "apokaluptein" which means to reveal (literally, to take the cover away).  But if you said to someone, "I was thinking about what you said, and I had a sudden apocalypse" you might be misunderstood.  "Apocalypse" is the Greek and Latin name for the Book of Revelation. Popular understanding has focused on the cataclysmic events of that book instead of on what it reveals, and so "apocalypse" has come to mean total or near-total destruction.

The word "epiphany" comes from the Greek word "epiphaineia" ("manifestation", literally, "shining upon").  In ancient times, it often referred to the appearance of a god among humans.  It was applied in this sense as a title to king Antiochus IV, whose persecution of Jewish traditions led to the Maccabean revolt in the mid-second century BC.  Christian tradition began to apply the word "epiphany"to the manifestation of Christ in the world at least as early as the fourth century AD.  Early celebrations of Epiphany seem to have commemorated both Jesus' birth (the moment his incarnation shined in the world) and his baptism (when his ministry became manifest).  The holiday later became a celebration of the visit of the magi, when Christ was first revealed to the Gentiles.

Our gospel lesson today includes Luke's account of the baptism of Jesus, afer which his role and identity are confirmed by the Holy Spirit descending on him in the form of a dove, along with a voice from heaven saying "You are my Son, the Beloved; with you I am well pleased."  I think it is not accidental that this epiphany occurs immediately after baptism, and that the Spirit takes the form of a dove.

All four gospels mention the dove as a form of the Holy Spirit descending on Jesus at his epiphany.  Matthew, Mark, and Luke place this immediately after his baptism, and they do not say whether anyone else saw it or heard the voice.  In John's gospel, John the Baptist says that he saw the Holy Spirit descending on Jesus as a dove.  Although he does not explicitly say that this occurred after John baptized Jesus, it could be inferred from the context.

The dove is not used explicitly for the Holy Spirit anywhere else in the Bible, but there might be some hints.  In the first chapter of Genesis, the spirit of God hovers over the face of the waters of the pre-creation chaos.  The word for "hover" is merachepheth, which is also used in Deuteronomy 32 to liken God to an eagle that hovers over the nest of its young.  So we might infer a bird-like image of the Holy Spirit here, but not necessarily dove-like.  Doves are mentioned often enough elsewhere in the Bible, but not necessarily as an image of the Holy Spirit.

Perhaps the most memorable mention of a dove in the Hebrew Bible is the one that Noah releases from the ark.  This is a very old story, old enough to share a common source with the Epic of Gilgamesh.  In the Biblical version, after the destruction wrought by the flood -- which recalls the waters of chaos before creation -- Noah releases the dove the first time, but the dove returns, not having found any place to land because the earth is still covered in water.  Seven days later, Noah sends the dove out again.  This time, she returns in the evening with something in her mouth: an freshly torn olive leaf.  What does this signify?  Peace?  Well, that's the common idea, but in this story it signifies life!  Life after total destruction!  A post-apocalyptic epiphany!

The first epistle of Peter, chapter 3, says that the flood of Noah's time is a type of baptism.  As the waters of the flood cleansed the world by means of death, so baptism in Christ cleanses us by burying us with Christ so that we may rise with him.  Everything in us that would draw us away from God and towards any lesser goal must be put to death in this way in order to proceed on the path of new life in Christ.  This is not as simple as reciting the creed.  If we say we want to follow Jesus, we must take up our cross -- although even our ability to do so rests in the grace of God and not in our own ability.

Jesus, in his baptism, exemplifies this journey for us.  Having descended into the depths, he emerges to new life in the Spirit and the assurance of sonship.  Not that Jesus became the son at that moment as the Arian heresy claimed, but in order to prefigure his death and resurrection, as well as ours.  This is, I think, why Jesus in Matthew's version of the story answers John's objection to baptizing him with "allow it now, for thus is it fitting for us to fulfill all righteousness".  Later, Jesus' cry from the cross, "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me" shows that he did in deed descend to the deepest of hells.  The empty tomb bears witness to the new life that was born in its womb.

Jesus also likened his death and resurrection to another story from the Hebrew Bible, that of Jonah: "For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of a huge fish, so the Son of Man will be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth."  Jonah, you will recall, was fleeing from the Lord, and as often happens when we are fleeing from God's path for us, things just kept getting worse.  First, a mighty storm threatens to sink the ship, then he gets thrown overboard into the sea, and finally a huge fish swallows him.  It is not until he reaches this, his lowest point, beyond all hope, that he turns to God.  God delivers him, and then he returns, although perhaps somewhat unenthusiastically, to the mission that God had set for him.  

Purgation by means of a storm and the waters of the deep, followed by deliverance to new life, parallels the story of the flood.  Incidentally, the name Jonah in Hebrew means "dove." It turns out, though, that Jonah's transformation is still not complete.  Besides learning obedience, he must also learn God's mercy -- even mercy to Jonah's worst enemies, the Assyrians.

So it is with us.  We often flee from the path that God has for us -- and we don't have to be criminal or immoral to do so.  Anything that we reserve to ourselves, anything that we don't surrender on the cross of Christ, can become our ship to Tarshish.  Money and possessions are the most visible, but far from the most difficult of these to release.  Reputation, admiration, willfulness, judgmentalism, fear, hurt and other internal possessions are much harder to let go of.  Often we have to be thrown overboard, we have to confront our depths and the monsters that live there -- and perhaps even be swallowed by them, before we can be released.

As with Jonah, our transformation takes time and comes by stages.  The sacrament of baptism is therefore a sacrament of initiation.  As powerful as it is in itself, it is but the beginning of our journey back to God.  We do not make this journey alone or under our own power, however.  Christ walks it too, every step of the way.  May that be our Epiphany, that God is with us.
