Proper 19

Readings: Exodus 32:7-14; Psalm 51; I Timothy 1:12-17; Luke 15:1-10

Our readings for today are about the mercy of God towards sinners.  Before you turn off your attention from that well-trodden topic, know that I intend to take a different route than most to explore it.  Let's start with evolution -- the evolution of ideas about God.

I for one believe in an eternal, inscrutable God who is not fully describable by any concepts that we can express.  A study of the history of religious ideas makes it plain that human concepts about God change and develop over time, while often maintaining continuity with the beliefs that went before.  The truth behind the concepts may remain constant, but whether you believe in those eternal truths or not, our ideas about them demonstrably evolve, though often quite slowly.  We can see some of that evolution of thought in the Bible itself.

Much of that process can be explained by changes in society that make certain metaphors seem more or less appropriate.  One metaphor for God that gets a lot of traction in the Hebrew Bible is God as King.  In first millenium BC Southwest Asian societies, no one was more powerful than the king.  Hence, God is called the king of Israel (I Samuel 8:7, Isaiah 44:6, Zephaniah 3:15, et al.), the king of all peoples (Psalm 47:8-9, 82:8, et al.), Andrew the king of all gods (Psalm 95:3, et al.).

There are several unfortunate aspects of this metaphor for our present understanding of God, beyond its tacit approval of male dominance and dominator culture generally. A human king often had to maintain his rule by threat of force.  Those who rebelled or disobeyed had to be punished.  If the offender pleaded for clemency, the king might grant it, but woe to them if they step out of line again -- they might not even get the chance to ask for mercy a second time.  The anger of the king was an important tool for maintaining his reputation of strength, and thereby his rule.  None of that can apply to a God who has no fear of being deposed.

In our Exodus reading, God's anger is kindled at the Israelites because they have made and worshiped the golden calf.  (We won't digress here on how this narrative is a polemic against the golden calves erected in the northern kingdom of Israel in their worship of Yahweh).  God in his anger wants to destroy the Israelites and make Moses’ descendants into his chosen nation instead.  Moses pleads with God to have mercy and to remember his covenant with Israel's ancestors.  But his primary argument is that destroying the Israelites will tarnish rather than polish his reputation.  Instead of being seen as a God who insists on obedience, the Egyptians will just think he is a God who maliciously led his people to destruction.  Moses is painted as the wise, disinterested counselor who keeps the king from acting in haste and bringing disaster on himself and his people.  God's mercy here is represented as largely self-interested.  Since the early Christian era, Christians have had trouble mapping this God onto the loving Father that Jesus taught, so much so that Marcion and others believed that they weren't the same God at all.  The church condemned those views as heretical, but Christians continue to struggle with the angry God of the Torah.

In Psalm 51 we have perhaps the best known of the penitential Psalms.  It contains a plea for mercy, but it has some key differences with the Exodus passage.  For one thing, the sin in question is personal rather than communal, which reflects a trend in the Bible away from national and towards individual relationship with God.  The rationale that the speaker employs is also different: instead of God's self-interest, the penitent invokes God's lovingkindness and compassion.  These words are worthy of discussion.  "Lovingkindness" translates the Hebrew word חסד ("chesed"), which means doing more for someone than the relationship requires, out of a genuine desire for their good.  "Compassion" translates רחם ("racham"), which in its noun form means "womb" -- evoking the bond between a child in utero and its mother.  Both of these terms are nurturing and centered in the other rather than the self.  They imply that God is interested in helping us grow out of the mess we're in.  This is further supported by verse 7, "you look for truth deep within me, and will make me understand wisdom secretly."  Cleansing the petitioner of this sin is more than forgiveness.  It is one step towards perfecting them deep down inside; a more than surface righteousness.

In our gospel lesson, when Jesus is asked why he socializes with sinners, he doesn't invoke the image of a king keeping his subjects in line.  Rather he describes himself as a doctor, bringing healing to those who need it.  In this metaphor, sin is not an act of rebellion or disobedience to authority (though it may evince those symptoms), but rather an illness or deficiency that can be treated -- and God wants to heal it.

Jesus then goes on to use two other metaphors for this condition: the lost sheep and the lost coin.  In her recent book, Into the Mess & Other Jesus Stories, Debie Thomas thoughtfully explores these two parables in the chapter "On Lostness."  She notes that both the lost sheep and the lost coin already belong to the shepherd and woman, respectively.  Sinners are not outsiders, they -- we -- belong to God already.  Furthermore, God has an intense desire to bring us back into relationship -- intense enough to leave the ninety-nine or turn the house upside down, and to throw a party when we are found.  Both of these parables, along with Jesus' presence among "tax collectors and sinners", indicate that (as Debie says), "God is where the lost things are."  That's where God works on us.  The dark night of the soul, according to St. John of the Cross, is the most fertile time for spiritual growth.

If all is well with us, perhaps we are either self-deceived or living too cautiously.  When we feel the need to be right, we easily turn a blind eye to our problems that lurk under the surface.  When we try to avoid any misstep or conflict, we end up doing very little good as well.  That is where the scribes and Pharisees appear to have been, according to what Jesus says to them.  Perhaps this is what Martin Luther meant when he advised Melanchthon, "Be a sinner, and sin boldly, but let your trust in Christ be stronger, and rejoice in Christ who is the victor over sin, death, and the world."  


Meister Eckhart goes so far as to say:

"Indeed, if you are rightly placed in the will of God, then you should not wish that the sin into which you fell had not happened. Of course, this is not the case because sin was something against God but, precisely because it was something against God, you were bound by it to greater love, you were humbled and brought low. And you should trust God that he would not have allowed it to happen unless he intended it to be for your profit.”

Sin, therefore, is a necessary part of growth, exactly as mistakes are a necessary part of learning.  That isn't, however, a license to continue making the same mistakes over and over again.  God wants to get us past our current failing so we can get on to the next one.  We all fail at times -- perhaps in one way or another we all fail at all times.  But God always wants to use those opportunities to lift us up, to heal us, and to transform us deeply into God's likeness.  May we see wherein we are lost, and may God quickly find us.

